The Age of Industrialisation



The Age of Industrialisation Chapter IV The Age of Industrialisation The Age of Industrialisation In
1900, a popular music publisher E.T. Paull produced a music book that had a picture on the cover
page announcing the ‘Dawn of the Century’ (Fig. 1). As you can see from the illustration, at the
centre of the picture is a goddess-like figure, the angel of progress, bearing the flag of the new
century. She is gently perched on a wheel with wings, symbolising time. Her flight is taking her
into the future.

Floating about, behind her, are the signs of progress: railway, camera, machines, printing press and
factory.

This glorification of machines and technology is even more marked in a picture which appeared on the
pages of a trade magazine over a hundred years ago (Fig. 2). It shows two magicians. The one at the
top is Aladdin from the Orient who built a beautiful palace with his the Mediterranean, usually
referring to Asia. The term arises out of a western viewpoint that sees this region as pre- modern,
traditional and mysterious Give two examples where modern development that is associated with
progress has led to problems. You may like to think of areas related to environmental issues,
nuclear weapons or disease. with his modern tools weaves a new magic: builds bridges, ships, towers
and high-rise buildings. Aladdin is shown as representing the East and the past, the mechanic stands
for the West and modernity.

These images offer us a triumphant account of the modern world.

Within this account the modern world is associated with rapid technological change and innovations,
machines and factories, railways and steamships. The history of industrialisation thus becomes
simply a story of development, and the modern age appears as a wonderful time of technological
progress.

These images and associations have now become part of popular imagination. Do you not see rapid
industrialisation as a time of progress and modernity? Do you not think that the spread of railways
and factories, and construction of high-rise buildings and bridges is a sign of society’s
development? How have these images developed? And how do we relate to these ideas? Is
industrialisation always based on rapid technological development? Can we today continue to glorify
continuous mechanisation of all work? What has industrialisation meant to people’s lives? To answer
such questions we need to turn to the history of industrialisation.

In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain, the first industrial
nation, and then India, where the pattern of industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule.

The Age of Industrialisation production of yarn. Notice that one wheel is moving only one spindle.