Accommodation in Belgium



Civil war: A violent conflict between opposing groups within a country that becomes so intense that
it appears like a war. result, the relations between the Sinhala and Tamil communities strained over
time.

The Sri Lankan Tamils launched parties and struggles for the recognition of Tamil as an official
language, for regional autonomy and equality of opportunity in securing education and jobs. But
their demand for more autonomy to provinces populated by the Tamils was repeatedly denied. By 1980s,
several political organisations were formed demanding an independent Tamil Eelam (state) in northern
and eastern parts of Sri Lanka.

The distrust between the two communities turned into widespread conflict. It soon turned into a
civil war. As a result thousands of people of both the communities have been killed. Many families
were forced to leave the country as refugees and many more lost their livelihoods. The civil war has
caused a terrible setback to the social, cultural and economic life of the country. It ended in
2009.

The photograph here is of a street address in Belgium. You will notice that place names and
directions in two languages – French and Dutch. © Wikipedia Po we r -sha r ing So you are saying
that sharing of power makes us more powerful. Sounds odd! Let me think.

What do we learn from these two stories of Belgium and Sri Lanka? Both are democracies. Yet, they
dealt with the question of power sharing differently. In Belgium, the leaders have realised that the
unity of the country is possible only by respecting the feelings and interests of different
communities and regions. Such a realisation resulted in mutually acceptable arrangements for sharing
power.

Sri Lanka shows us a contrasting example. It shows us that if a majority community wants to force
its dominance over others and refuses to share power, it can undermine the unity of the country.

Read any newspaper for one week and make clippings of news related to ongoing conflicts or wars. A
group of five students could pool their clippings together and do the following:  Classify these
conflicts by their location (your state, India, outside India).  Find out the cause of each of
these conflicts. How many of these are related to power sharing disputes?  Which of these conflicts
could be resolved by working out power sharing arrangements? European Parliament in Brussels,
Belgium accepted equal representation in the Central Government.

Apart from the Central and the State Government, there is a third kind of government. This
‘community government’ is elected by people belonging to one language community – Dutch, French and
German-speaking – no matter where they live. This government has the power regarding cultural,
educational and language-related issues.

You might find the Belgian model very complicated. It indeed is very complicated, even for people
living in Belgium. But these arrangements have worked well so far. They helped to avoid civic strife
between the two major communities and a possible division of the country on linguistic lines. When
many countries of Europe came together to form the European Union, Brussels was chosen as its
headquarters.

De moc ra tic Polit ics Annette studies in a Dutch medium school in the northern region of Belgium.
Many French-speaking students in her school want the medium of instruction to be French.

Selvi studies in a school in the northern region of Sri Lanka.

All the students in her school are Tamil-speaking and they want the medium of instruction to be
Tamil.

If the parents of Annette and Selvi were to approach respective governments to realise the desire of
the child who is more likely to succeed? And why? Why power sharing is desirable? Thus, two
different sets of reasons can be given in favour of power sharing.

Firstly, power sharing is good because it helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social
groups. Since social conflict often leads to violence and political instability, power sharing is a
good way to ensure the stability of political order. Imposing the will of majority community over
others may look like an attractive option in the short run, but in the long run it undermines the
unity of the nation.

Tyranny of the majority is not just oppressive for the minority; it often affects majority adversely
as well.

There is a second, deeper reason why power sharing is good for democracies. Power sharing is the
very spirit of democracy. A democratic rule involves sharing power with those affected by its
exercise, and who have to live with its effects. People have a right to be consulted on how they are
to be governed. A legitimate government is one where citizens, through participation, acquire a
stake in the system.

Let us call the first set of reasons prudential and the second moral.

While prudential reasons stress that power sharing will bring out better outcomes, moral reasons
emphasise the very act of power sharing as valuable.

Prudential: Based on prudence, or on careful calculation of gains and losses. Prudential decisions
are usually contrasted with decisions based purely on moral considerations.

The cartoon at the left refers to the problems of running the Germany’s grand coalition government
that includes the two major parties of the country, namely the Christian Democratic Union and the
Social Democratic Party. The two parties are historically rivals to each other. They had to form a
coalition government because neither of them got clear majority of seats on their own in the 2005
elections. They take divergent positions on several policy matters, but still jointly run the
government.

For details about the German Parliament, visit https://www.bundestag.de/en © Tab - The Calgary Sun,
Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Po we r -sha r ing As usual, Vikram was driving the motorbike under a vow of silence and Vetal was
the pillion rider. As usual, Vetal started telling Vikram a story to keep him awake while driving.
This time the story went as follows: “In the city of Beirut, there lived a man called Khalil. His
parents came from different communities. His father was an Orthodox Christian and mother a Sunni
Muslim. This was not so uncommon in this modern, cosmopolitan city. People from various communities
that lived in Lebanon came to live in its capital, Beirut. They lived together, intermingled, yet
fought a bitter civil war among themselves. One of Khalil’s uncles was killed in that war.

At the end of this civil war, Lebanon’s leaders came together and agreed to some basic rules for
power sharing among different communities. As per these rules, the country’s President must belong
to the Maronite sect of Catholic Christians. The Prime Minister must be from the Sunni Muslim
community. The post of Deputy Prime Minister is fixed for Orthodox Christian sect and that of the
Speaker for Shi’a Muslims. Under this pact, the Christians agreed not to seek French protection and
the Muslims agreed not to seek unification with the neighbouring state of Syria.When the Christians
and Muslims came to this agreement, they were nearly equal in population. Both sides have continued
to respect this agreement though now the Muslims are in clear majority.

Khalil does not like this system one bit. He is a popular man with political ambition.

But under the present system, the top position is out of his reach. He does not practise either his
father’s or his mother’s religion and does not wish to be known by either. He cannot understand why
Lebanon can’t be like any other ‘normal’ democracy. “Just hold an election, allow everyone to
contest and whoever wins maximum votes becomes the president, no matter which community he comes
from. Why can’t we do that, like in other democracies of the world?” he asks. His elders, who have
seen the bloodshed of the civil war, tell him that the present system is the best guarantee for
peace…” The story was not finished, but they had reached the TV tower where they stopped every day.
Vetal wrapped up quickly and posed his customary question to Vikram: “If you had the power to
rewrite the rules in Lebanon, what would you do? Would you adopt the ‘regular’ rules followed
everywhere, as Khalil suggests? Or stick to the old rules? Or do something else?” Vetal did not
forget to remind Vikram of their basic pact: “If you have an answer in mind and yet do not speak up,
your mobike will freeze, and so will you!” Can you help poor Vikram in answering Vetal? Khalil’s
dilemma De moc ra tic Polit ics power should be distributed among as many citizens as possible.

In modern democracies, power sharing arrangements can take many forms. Let us look at some of the
most common arrangements that we have or will come across. 1 Power is shared among different organs
of government, such as the legislature, executive and judiciary.

Let us call this horizontal distribution of power because it allows different organs of government
placed at the same level to exercise different powers. Such a separation ensures that none of the
organs can exercise unlimited power. Each organ checks the others. This results in a balance of
power among various institutions.

Last year, we studied that in a democracy, even though ministers and government officials exercise
power, they are responsible to the Parliament or State Assemblies.

Similarly, although judges are appointed by the executive, they can check the functioning of
executive or laws made by the legislatures. This arrangement is called a system of checks and
balances. 2 Power can be shared among governments at different levels – a general government for the
entire country and governments at the provincial or regional level. Such a general government for
the entire country is usually called federal government. In India, we refer to it as the Central or
Union Government.

The governments at the provincial or regional level are called by different names in different
countries.

The idea of power-sharing has emerged in opposition to the notions of undivided political power. For
a long time, it was believed that all power of a government must reside in one person or group of
persons located at one place. It was felt that if the power to decide is dispersed, it would not be
possible to take quick decisions and to enforce them.

But these notions have changed with the emergence of democracy.

One basic principle of democracy is that people are the source of all political power. In a
democracy, people rule themselves through institutions of self-government. In a good democratic
government, due respect is given to diverse groups and views that exist in a society.

Everyone has a voice in the shaping of public policies. Therefore, it follows that in a democracy,
political