NOTES FOR TEACHERS



CHAPTER I : DEVELOPMENT Development has many aspects. The purpose of this chapter is to enable
students to understand this idea. They have to understand that people have different perspectives on
development and there are ways by which we can arrive at common indicators for development. To do
this, we have used situations that they can respond to in an intuitive manner; we have also
presented analysis that is more complex and macro in nature.

How can countries or states be compared using some selected development indicators is another
question that students would read about in this chapter. Economic development can be measured and
income is the most common method for measuring development. However, the income method, though
useful, has several weaknesses. Hence, we need newer ways of looking at development using indicators
of quality of life and environmental sustainability.

It is necessary for you to expect the students to respond actively in the classroom and on a topic
such as the above, there would be wide variation in opinion and possibility of debate. Allow
students to argue their point of view. At the end of each section there are a few purposes: first,
they recap the ideas discussed in the section and second, they enable better understanding of the
themes discussed by bringing the learners closer to their real life situations.

There are certain terms used in this chapter that would require clarification — Per Capita Income,
Literacy Rate, Infant Mortality Rate, Attendance Ratio, Life Expectancy, Gross Enrolment Ratio, and
Human Development Index. Though data pertaining to these terms are provided, these would need
further explanation. You may also need to clarify the concept of Purchasing Power Parity that is
used to calculate Gross National Income per capita in Table 1.6. It is necessary to keep in mind
that these terms are used as an aid to the discussion and not something to be memorised.

Sources for Information The data for this chapter is taken from reports published by the Government
of India (Economic Survey, Reports of the National Family Health Survey and Handbook of Statistics
on the Indian Economy), United Nations Development Programme (Human Development Report) and World
Bank (World Development Indicators). Many of these reports are published every year. It may be
interesting to look up these reports if they are available in your school library. If not, you may
log on to the websites of these institutions (www.budgetindia.nic.in,
www.undp.org,www.worldbank.org, www.rbi.org).

UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT
OPMENT OPMENT EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT The idea of development or progress has always been with us. We
have aspirations or desires about what we would like to do and how we would like to live. Similarly,
we have ideas about what a country should be like.

What are the essential things that we require? Can life be better for all? How should people live
together? Can there be more equality? Development involves thinking about these which we can work
towards achieving these goals. This is a complex task and in this chapter we shall make a beginning
at understanding development. You will learn more about these issues in greater depth in higher
classes. Also, you will find not just in economics but also in your course in history and political
science.

This is because the way we live today is influenced by the past. We can’t desire for change without
being aware of this. In the same way, it is only through a democratic political process that these
hopes and possibilities can be achieved in real life.

CHAPTER I “Without me they cannot develop... in this system I cannot develop!” UNDERST NDERST
NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT Let
us try to imagine what development or progress is likely to mean to different persons listed in
Table 1.1. What are their aspirations? You will find that some columns are partially filled. Try to
complete the table. You can also add any other category of persons.

Category of Person Landless rural labourers Prosperous farmers from Punjab Farmers who depend only
on rain for growing crops A rural woman from a land owning family Urban unemployed youth A boy from
a rich urban family A girl from a rich urban family An adivasi from Narmada valley