3.1 The Salt March and the Civil Disobedience Movement



Mahatma Gandhi found in salt a powerful symbol that could unite the nation. On 31 January 1930, he
sent a letter to Viceroy Irwin stating eleven demands. Some of these were of general interest;
others were specific demands of different classes, from industrialists to peasants. The idea was to
make the demands wide-ranging, so that all classes within Indian society could identify with them
and everyone could be brought together in a united campaign. The most stirring of all was the demand
to abolish the salt tax. Salt was something consumed by the rich and the poor alike, and it was one
of the most essential items of food. The tax on salt and the government monopoly over its
production, Mahatma Gandhi declared, revealed the most oppressive face of British rule.

Mahatma Gandhi’s letter was, in a way, an ultimatum. If the demands were not fulfilled by 11 March,
the letter stated, the Congress would launch a civil disobedience campaign. Irwin was unwilling to
negotiate. So Mahatma Gandhi started his famous salt march accompanied by 78 of his trusted
volunteers. The march was over 240 miles, from Gandhiji’s ashram in Sabarmati to the Gujarati
coastal town of Dandi. The volunteers walked for 24 days, about 10 miles a day. Thousands came to
hear Mahatma Gandhi wherever he stopped, and he told them what he meant by swaraj and urged them to
peacefully defy the British. On 6 April he reached Dandi, and ceremonially violated the law,
manufacturing salt by boiling sea water.

This marked the beginning of the Civil Disobedience Movement.

How was this movement different from the Non-Cooperation Movement? People were now asked not only to
refuse cooperation The Independence Day Pledge, 26 January ‘We believe that it is the inalienable
right of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their
toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may have full opportunities of growth. We
believe also that if any government deprives a people of these rights and oppresses them, the people
have a further right to alter it or to abolish it.

The British Government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has
based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India economically, politically,
culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore, that India must sever the British connection and
attain Purna Swaraj or Complete Independence.’ colonial laws. Thousands in different parts of the
country broke the salt law, manufactured salt and demonstrated in front of government salt
factories. As the movement spread, foreign cloth was boycotted, and liquor shops were picketed.
Peasants refused to pay revenue and chaukidari taxes, village officials resigned, and in many places
forest people violated forest laws – going into Reserved Forests to collect wood and graze cattle.

Worried by the developments, the colonial government began arresting the Congress leaders one by
one. This led to violent clashes in many palaces. When Abdul Ghaffar Khan, a devout disciple of
Mahatma Gandhi, was arrested in April 1930, angry crowds demonstrated in the streets of Peshawar,
facing armoured cars and police firing. Many were killed. A month later, when Mahatma Gandhi himself
was arrested, industrial workers in Sholapur attacked police posts, municipal buildings, lawcourts
and railway stations – all structures that symbolised British rule. A frightened government
responded with a policy of brutal repression. Peaceful satyagrahis were attacked, women and children
were beaten, and about 100,000 people were arrested.

In such a situation, Mahatma Gandhi once again decided to call off the movement and entered into a
pact with Irwin on 5 March 1931.

By this Gandhi-Irwin Pact, Gandhiji consented to participate in a Round Table Conference (the
Congress had boycotted the first Gandhi was accompanied by 78 volunteers. On the way they were
joined by thousands.

Nationalism in India Round Table Conference) in London and the government agreed to release the
political prisoners. In December 1931, Gandhiji went to London for the conference, but the
negotiations broke down and he returned disappointed. Back in India, he discovered that the
government had begun a new cycle of repression. Ghaffar Khan and Jawaharlal Nehru were both in jail,
the Congress had been declared illegal, and a series of measures had been imposed to prevent
meetings, demonstrations and boycotts. With great apprehension, Mahatma Gandhi relaunched the Civil
Disobedience Movement.

For over a year, the movement continued, but by 1934 it lost its momentum.