8.2 Print and the Poor People



Very cheap small books were brought to markets in nineteenth-century Madras towns and sold at
crossroads, allowing poor people travelling to markets to buy them. Public libraries were set up
from the early twentieth century, expanding the access to books. These libraries were located mostly
in cities and towns, and at times in prosperous villages.

For rich local patrons, setting up a library was a way of acquiring prestige.

From the late nineteenth century, issues of caste discrimination began to be written about in many
printed tracts and essays. Jyotiba Phule, the Maratha pioneer of ‘low caste’ protest movements,
wrote about the injustices of the caste system in his Gulamgiri (1871). In the twentieth century,
B.R. Ambedkar in Maharashtra and E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker in Madras, better known as Periyar, wrote
powerfully on caste and their writings were read by people all over India. Local protest movements
and sects also created a lot of popular journals and tracts criticising ancient scriptures and
envisioning a new and just future.

Workers in factories were too overworked and lacked the education to write much about their
experiences. But Kashibaba, a Kanpur millworker, wrote and published Chhote Aur Bade Ka Sawal in
1938 to show the links between caste and class exploitation. The poems of another Kanpur millworker,
who wrote under the name of Sudarshan Chakr between 1935 and 1955, were brought together and
published in a collection called Sacchi Kavitayan. By the 1930s, Bangalore cotton millworkers set up
libraries to educate themselves, following the example of Bombay workers. These were sponsored by
social reformers who tried to restrict excessive drinking among them, to bring literacy and,
sometimes, to propagate the message of nationalism. social changes taking place in society? Ø What
changes in society were taking place to provoke this reaction? Ø Do you agree with the artist’s
view? The picture suggests traditional family roles. The Sahib holds a liquor bottle in his hand
while the Memsahib plays the violin.

He was a doyen of modern Assamese literature.

Burhi Aair Sadhu (Grandma’s Tales) is among his notable works. He penned the popular song of Assam,
‘O Mor Apunar Desh’ (O’ my beloved land).

Print Culture