4 The Sense of Collective Belonging



Nationalism spreads when people begin to believe that they are all part of the same nation, when
they discover some unity that binds them together. But how did the nation become a reality in the
minds of people? How did people belonging to different communities, regions or language groups
develop a sense of collective belonging? This sense of collective belonging came partly through the
experience of united struggles. But there were also a variety of cultural processes through which
nationalism captured people’s imagination. History and fiction, folklore and songs, popular prints
and symbols, all played a part in the making of nationalism.

Notice how Tilak is surrounded by symbols of unity. The sacred institutions of different faiths
(temple, church, masjid) frame the central figure.

Nationalism in India The identity of the nation, as you know (see Chapter 1), is most often
symbolised in a figure or image. This helps create an image with which people can identify the
nation. It was in the twentieth century, with the growth of nationalism, that the identity of India
came to be visually associated with the image of Bharat Mata. The image was first created by Bankim
Chandra Chattopadhyay. In the 1870s he wrote ‘Vande Mataram’ as a hymn to the motherland.

Later it was included in his novel Anandamath and widely sung during the Swadeshi movement in
Bengal. Moved by the Swadeshi movement, Abanindranath Tagore painted his famous image of Bharat Mata
(see Fig. 12). In this painting Bharat Mata is portrayed as an ascetic figure; she is calm,
composed, divine and spiritual.

In subsequent years, the image of Bharat Mata acquired many different forms, as it circulated in
popular prints, and was painted by different artists (see Fig. 14). Devotion to this mother figure
came to be seen as evidence of one’s nationalism.

Ideas of nationalism also developed through a movement to revive Indian folklore. In late-
nineteenth-century India, nationalists began recording folk tales sung by bards and they toured
villages to gather folk songs and legends. These tales, they believed, gave a true picture of
traditional culture that had been corrupted and damaged by outside forces. It was essential to
preserve this folk tradition in order to discover one’s national identity and restore a sense of
pride in one’s past. In Bengal, Rabindranath Tagore himself began collecting ballads, nursery rhymes
and myths, and led the movement for folk Notice that the mother figure here is shown as dispensing
learning, food and clothing. The mala in one hand emphasises her ascetic quality.

Abanindranath Tagore, like Ravi Varma before him, tried to develop a style of painting that could be
seen as truly Indian. close to his heart. In a lot of popular prints, nationalist leaders are shown
offering their heads to Bharat Mata. The idea of sacrifice for the mother was powerful within
popular imagination. ‘In earlier times, foreign travellers in India marvelled at the courage,
truthfulness and modesty of the people of the Arya vamsa; now they remark mainly on the absence of
those qualities. In those days Hindus would set out on conquest and hoist their flags in Tartar,
China and other countries; now a few soldiers from a tiny island far away are lording it over the
land of India.’ Tarinicharan Chattopadhyay, Bharatbarsher Itihas (The History of Bharatbarsh), vol.
1, 1858. collection of Tamil folk tales, The Folklore of Southern India. He believed that folklore
was national literature; it was ‘the most trustworthy manifestation of people’s real thoughts and
characteristics’.

As the national movement developed, nationalist leaders became more and more aware of such icons and
symbols in unifying people and inspiring in them a feeling of nationalism. During the Swadeshi
movement in Bengal, a tricolour flag (red, green and yellow) was designed. It had eight lotuses
representing eight provinces of British India, and a crescent moon, representing Hindus and Muslims.
By 1921, Gandhiji had designed the Swaraj flag. It was again a tricolour (red, green and white) and
had a spinning wheel in the centre, representing the Gandhian ideal of self-help. Carrying the flag,
holding it aloft, during marches became a symbol of defiance.

Another means of creating a feeling of nationalism was through reinterpretation of history. By the
end of the nineteenth century many Indians began feeling that to instill a sense of pride in the
nation, Indian history had to be thought about differently. The British saw Indians as backward and
primitive, incapable of governing themselves. In response, Indians began looking into the past to
discover India’s great achievements. They wrote about the glorious developments in ancient times
when art and architecture, science and mathematics, religion and culture, law and philosophy, crafts
and trade had flourished. This glorious time, in their view, was followed by a history of decline,
when India was colonised. These nationalist histories urged the readers to take pride in India’s
great achievements in the past and struggle to change the miserable conditions of life under British
rule.

These efforts to unify people were not without problems. When the past being glorified was Hindu,
when the images celebrated were drawn from Hindu iconography, then people of other communities felt
left out. one painted by Abanindranath Tagore. Here she is shown with a trishul, standing beside a
lion and an elephant – both symbols of power and authority.

Conclusion A growing anger against the colonial government was thus bringing together various groups
and classes of Indians into a common struggle for freedom in the first half of the twentieth
century. The Congress under the leadership of Mahatma Gandhi tried to channel people’s grievances
into organised movements for independence. Through such movements the nationalists tried to forge a
national unity. But as we have seen, diverse groups and classes participated in these movements with
varied aspirations and expectations. As their grievances were wide-ranging, freedom from colonial
rule also meant different things to different people. The Congress continuously attempted to resolve
differences, and ensure that the demands of one group did not alienate another. This is precisely
why the unity within the movement often broke down.

The high points of Congress disunity and inner conflict between groups.

In other words, what was emerging was a nation with many voices wanting freedom from colonial rule.

Quit India Movement The failure of the Cripps Mission and the effects of World War II created
widespread discontentment in India. This led Gandhiji to launch a movement calling for complete
withdrawal of the British from India. The Congress Working Committee, in its meeting in Wardha on 14
July 1942, passed the historic ‘Quit India’ resolution demanding the immediate transfer of power to
Indians and quit India. On 8 August 1942 in Bombay, the All India Congress Committee endorsed the
resolution which called for a non-violent mass struggle on the widest possible scale throughout the
country. It was on this occasion that Gandhiji delivered the famous ‘Do or Die’ speech. The call for
‘Quit India’ almost brought the state machinery to a standstill in large parts of the country as
people voluntarily threw themselves into the thick of the movement. People observed hartals, and
demonstrations and processions were accompanied by national songs and slogans. The movement was
truly a mass movement which brought into its ambit thousands of ordinary people, namely students,
workers and peasants. It also saw the active participation of leaders, namely, Jayprakash Narayan,
Aruna Asaf Ali and Ram Manohar Lohia and many women such as Matangini Hazra in Bengal, Kanaklata
Barua in Assam and Rama Devi in Odisha. The British responded with much force, yet it took more than
a year to suppress the movement.

India Movement List all the different social groups which joined the Non-Cooperation Movement of
1921.

Then choose any three and write about their hopes and struggles to show why they joined the
movement. 2. 3. 4.

Why did political leaders differ sharply over the question of separate electorates? b) How the First
World War helped in the growth of the National Movement in India. c) Why Indians were outraged by
the Rowlatt Act. d) Why Gandhiji decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement. 2.

What is meant by the idea of satyagraha? 3.

Write a newspaper report on: a) The Jallianwala Bagh massacre b) The Simon Commission 4.