5.1 Small-scale Industries Predominate



While factory industries grew steadily after the war, large industries formed only a small segment
of the economy. Most of them – about 67 per cent in 1911 – were located in Bengal and Bombay.

Over the rest of the country, small-scale production continued to predominate. Only a small
proportion of the total industrial labour force worked in registered factories: 5 per cent in 1911
and 10 per cent in 1931. The rest worked in small workshops and household units, often located in
alleys and bylanes, invisible to the passer-by.

In fact, in some instances, handicrafts production actually expanded in the twentieth century. This
is true even in the case of the handloom sector that we have discussed. While cheap machine-made
thread wiped out the spinning industry in the nineteenth century, the weavers survived, despite
problems. In the twentieth century, handloom cloth production expanded steadily: almost trebling
between 1900 and 1940.

How did this happen? This was partly because of technological changes. Handicrafts people adopt new
technology if that helps them improve production without excessively pushing up costs. So, by the
second decade of the twentieth century we find weavers using looms with a fly shuttle.

This increased productivity per worker, speeded up production and reduced labour demand. By 1941,
over 35 per cent of handlooms in India were fitted with fly shuttles: in regions like Travancore,
Madras, Mysore, Cochin, Bengal the proportion was 70 to 80 per cent. There were several other small
innovations that helped weavers improve their productivity and compete with the mill sector.

The intricate designs of hand-woven cloth could not be easily copied by the mills. weaving, moved by
means of ropes and pullies.

It places the horizontal threads ( called the weft) into the verticle threads (called the warp). The
invention of the fly shuttle made it possible for weavers to operate large looms and weave wide
pieces of cloth.

The Age of Industrialisation Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others to
survive the competition with mill industries. Amongst weavers some produced coarse cloth while
others wove finer varieties. The coarser cloth was bought by the poor and its demand fluctuated
violently.

In times of bad harvests and famines, when the rural poor had little to eat, and their cash income
disappeared, they could not possibly buy cloth. The demand for the finer varieties bought by the
well-to-do was more stable. The rich could buy these even when the poor starved. Famines did not
affect the sale of Banarasi or Baluchari saris. Moreover, as you have seen, mills could not imitate
specialised weaves. Saris with woven borders, or the famous lungis and handkerchiefs of Madras,
could not be easily displaced by mill production.

Weavers and other craftspeople who continued to expand production through the twentieth century, did
not necessarily prosper.

They lived hard lives and worked long hours. Very often the entire household – including all the
women and children – had to work at various stages of the production process. But they were not
simply remnants of past times in the age of factories. Their life and labour was integral to the
process of industrialisation. regions.

Madras Bombay Bengal Bihar United Provinces Punjab Central Provinces