3.3 The Limits of Civil Disobedience



Not all social groups were moved by the abstract concept of swaraj.

One such group was the nation’s ‘untouchables’, who from around the 1930s had begun to call
themselves dalit or oppressed. For long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending
the sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus. But Mahatma Gandhi declared that swaraj would not
come for a hundred years if untouchability was not eliminated. He called the ‘untouchables’ harijan,
Why did various classes and groups of Indians participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement? During
the national movement, many women, for the first time in their lives, moved out of their homes on to
a public arena.

Amongst the marchers you can see many old women, and mothers with children in their arms. or the
children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them entry into temples, and access to public wells,
tanks, roads and schools. He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the bhangi (the
sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change their heart and give up ‘the sin of untouchability’.
But many dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the problems of the community.
They began organising themselves, demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a
separate electorate that would choose dalit members for legislative councils. Political empowerment,
they believed, would resolve the problems of their social disabilities. Dalit participation in the
Civil Disobedience Movement was therefore limited, particularly in the Maharashtra and Nagpur region
where their organisation was quite strong.

Dr B.R. Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed
with Mahatma Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference by demanding separate electorates for
dalits. When the British government conceded Ambedkar’s demand, Gandhiji began a fast unto death. He
believed that separate electorates for dalits would slow down the process of their integration into
society.

Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji’s position and the result was the Poona Pact of September
1932. It gave the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in
provincial and central legislative councils, but they were to be voted in by the general electorate.
The dalit movement, however, continued to be apprehensive of the Congress-led national movement.

Some of the Muslim political organisations in India were also lukewarm in their response to the
Civil Disobedience Movement. After the decline of the Non-Cooperation-Khilafat Movement, a large
section of Muslims felt alienated from the Congress. From the mid-1920s the Congress came to be more
visibly associated with openly Hindu religious nationalist groups like the Hindu Mahasabha. As
relations between Hindus and Muslims worsened, each community organised religious processions with
militant fervour, provoking Hindu-Muslim communal clashes and riots in various cities. Every riot
deepened the distance between the two communities.

The Congress and the Muslim League made efforts to renegotiate an alliance, and in 1927 it appeared
that such a unity could be forged.

The important differences were over the question of representation in the future assemblies that
were to be elected. Muhammad Ali Wardha, 1935.

Nationalism in India Jinnah, one of the leaders of the Muslim League, was willing to give up the
demand for separate electorates, if Muslims were assured reserved seats in the Central Assembly and
representation in proportion to population in the Muslim-dominated provinces (Bengal and Punjab).
Negotiations over the question of representation continued but all hope of resolving the issue at
the All Parties Conference in 1928 disappeared when M.R. Jayakar of the Hindu Mahasabha strongly
opposed efforts at compromise.

When the Civil Disobedience Movement started there was thus an atmosphere of suspicion and distrust
between communities.

Alienated from the Congress, large sections of Muslims could not respond to the call for a united
struggle. Many Muslim leaders and intellectuals expressed their concern about the status of Muslims
as a minority within India. They feared that the culture and identity of minorities would be
submerged under the domination of a Hindu majority.

In 1930, Sir Muhammad Iqbal, as president of the Muslim League, reiterated the importance of
separate electorates for the Muslims as an important safeguard for their minority political
interests. His statement is supposed to have provided the intellectual justification for the
Pakistan demand that came up in subsequent years. This is what he said: ‘I have no hesitation in
declaring that if the principle that the Indian Muslim is entitled to full and free development on
the lines of his own culture and tradition in his own Indian home-lands is recognised as the basis
of a permanent communal settlement, he will be ready to stake his all for the freedom of India. The
principle that each group is entitled to free development on its own lines is not inspired by any
feeling of narrow communalism … A community which is inspired by feelings of ill-will towards other
communities is low and ignoble. I entertain the highest respect for the customs, laws, religions and
social institutions of other communities. Nay, it is my duty according to the teachings of the
Quran, even to defend their places of worship, if need be. Yet I love the communal group which is
the source of life and behaviour and which has formed me what I am by giving me its religion, its
literature, its thought, its culture and thereby its whole past as a living operative factor in my
present consciousness … ‘Communalism in its higher aspect, then, is indispensable to the formation
of a harmonious whole in a country like India.

The units of Indian society are not territorial as in European countries … The principle of European
democracy cannot be applied to India without recognising the fact of communal groups. The Muslim
demand for the creation of a Muslim India within India is, therefore, perfectly justified… ‘The
Hindu thinks that separate electorates are contrary to the spirit of true nationalism, because he
understands the word “nation” to mean a kind of universal amalgamation in which no communal entity
ought to retain its private individuality.

Such a state of things, however, does not exist. India is a land of racial and religious variety.
Add to this the general economic inferiority of the Muslims, their enormous debt, especially in the
Punjab, and their insufficient majorities in some of the provinces, as at present constituted and
you will begin to see clearly the meaning of our anxiety to retain separate electorates.’ different
way?