1 The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation



The first clear expression of nationalism came with the French Revolution in 1789. France, as you
would remember, was a full-fledged territorial state in 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch.

The political and constitutional changes that came in the wake of the French Revolution led to the
transfer of sovereignty from the monarchy to a body of French citizens. The revolution proclaimed
that it was the people who would henceforth constitute the nation and shape its destiny.

From the very beginning, the French revolutionaries introduced various measures and practices that
could create a sense of collective identity amongst the French people. The ideas of la patrie (the
fatherland) and le citoyen (the citizen) emphasised the notion of a united community enjoying equal
rights under a constitution. A new French flag, the tricolour, was chosen to replace the former
royal standard. The Estates General was elected by the body of active citizens and renamed the
National Assembly. New hymns were composed, oaths taken and martyrs commemorated, all in the name of
the nation. A centralised administrative system was put in place and it formulated uniform laws for
all citizens within its territory. Internal customs duties and dues were abolished and a uniform
system of weights and measures was adopted.

Regional dialects were discouraged and French, as it was spoken and written in Paris, became the
common language of the nation.

The revolutionaries further declared that it was the mission and the destiny of the French nation to
liberate the peoples of Europe from despotism, in other words to help other peoples of Europe to
become nations.

When the news of the events in France reached the different cities of Europe, students and other
members of educated middle classes began setting up Jacobin clubs. Their activities and campaigns
prepared the way for the French armies which moved into Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and much of
Italy in the 1790s. With the outbreak of the revolutionary wars, the French armies began to carry
the idea of nationalism abroad. 1798.

The image of the French Bastille being stormed by the revolutionary crowd has been placed next to a
similar fortress meant to represent the bastion of despotic rule in the German province of Kassel.
Accompanying the illustration is the slogan: ‘The people must seize their own freedom!’ Rebmann
lived in the city of Mainz and was a member of a German Jacobin group.

Within the wide swathe of territory that came under his control, Napoleon set about introducing many
of the reforms that he had already introduced in France. Through a return to monarchy Napoleon had,
no doubt, destroyed democracy in France, but in the administrative field he had incorporated
revolutionary principles in order to make the whole system more rational and efficient. The Civil
Code of 1804 – usually known as the Napoleonic Code – did away with all privileges based on birth,
established equality before the law and secured the right to property. This Code was exported to the
regions under French control. In the Dutch Republic, in Switzerland, in Italy and Germany, Napoleon
simplified administrative divisions, abolished the feudal system and freed peasants from serfdom and
manorial dues. In the towns too, guild restrictions were removed. Transport and communication
systems were improved. Peasants, artisans, workers and new businessmen Nationalism in Europe enjoyed
a new-found freedom. Businessmen and small-scale producers of goods, in particular, began to realise
that uniform laws, standardised weights and measures, and a common national currency would
facilitate the movement and exchange of goods and capital from one region to another.

However, in the areas conquered, the reactions of the local populations to French rule were mixed.
Initially, in many places such as Holland and Switzerland, as well as in certain cities like
Brussels, Mainz, Milan and Warsaw, the French armies were welcomed as harbingers of liberty. But the
initial enthusiasm soon turned to hostility, as it became clear that the new administrative
arrangements did not go hand in hand with political freedom. Increased taxation, censorship, forced
conscription into the French armies required to conquer the rest of Europe, all seemed to outweigh
the advantages of the administrative changes. by the French armies. French soldiers, recognisable by
their blue, white and red uniforms, have been portrayed as oppressors as they seize a peasant’s cart
(left), harass some young women (centre foreground) and force a peasant down to his knees. The
plaque being affixed to the Tree of Liberty carries a German inscription which in translation reads:
‘Take freedom and equality from us, the model of humanity.’ This is a sarcastic reference to the
claim of the French as being liberators who opposed monarchy in the territories they entered.

Napoleon here is represented as a postman on his way back to France after he lost the battle of
Leipzig in 1813. Each letter dropping out of his bag bears the names of the territories he lost.

If you look at the map of mid-eighteenth-century Europe you will find that there were no ‘nation-
states’ as we know them today.

What we know today as Germany, Italy and Switzerland were divided into kingdoms, duchies and cantons
whose rulers had their autonomous territories. Eastern and Central Europe were under autocratic
monarchies within the territories of which lived diverse peoples. They did not see themselves as
sharing a collective identity or a common culture. Often, they even spoke different languages and
belonged to different ethnic groups. The Habsburg Empire that ruled over Austria-Hungary, for
example, was a patchwork of many different regions and peoples. It included the Alpine regions – the
Tyrol, Austria and the Sudetenland – as well as Bohemia, where the aristocracy was predominantly
German-speaking. It also included the Italian-speaking provinces of Lombardy and Venetia.

In Hungary, half of the population spoke Magyar while the other half spoke a variety of dialects. In
Galicia, the aristocracy spoke Polish. Besides these three dominant groups, there also lived within
the boundaries of the empire, a mass of subject peasant peoples – Bohemians and Slovaks to the
north, Slovenes in Carniola, Croats to the south, and Roumans to the east in Transylvania. Such
differences did not easily promote a sense of political unity. The only tie binding these diverse
groups together was a common allegiance to the emperor.

How did nationalism and the idea of the nation-state emerge? Socially and politically, a landed
aristocracy was the dominant class on the continent. The members of this class were united by a
common way of life that cut across regional divisions. They owned estates in the countryside and
also town-houses. They spoke French for purposes of diplomacy and in high society. Their families
were often connected by ties of marriage. This powerful aristocracy was, however, numerically a
small group. The majority of the population was made up of the peasantry. To the west, the bulk of
the land was farmed by tenants and small owners, while in Eastern and Central Europe the pattern of
landholding was characterised by vast estates which were cultivated by serfs.