4.1 Germany – Can the Army be the Architect of a Nation?



After 1848, nationalism in Europe moved away from its association with democracy and revolution.
Nationalist sentiments were often mobilised by conservatives for promoting state power and achieving
political domination over Europe.

This can be observed in the process by which Germany and Italy came to be unified as nation-states.
As you have seen, nationalist feelings were widespread among middle-class Germans, who in 1848 tried
to unite the different regions of the German confederation into a nation-state governed by an
elected parliament. This liberal initiative to nation-building was, however, repressed by the
combined forces of the monarchy and the military, supported by the large landowners (called Junkers)
of Prussia.

From then on, Prussia took on the leadership of the movement for national unification. Its chief
minister, Otto von Bismarck, was the architect of this process carried out with the help of the
Prussian army and bureaucracy. Three wars over seven years – with Austria, Denmark and France –
ended in Prussian victory and completed the process of unification.

In January 1871, the Prussian king, William I, was proclaimed German Emperor in a ceremony held at
Versailles.

On the bitterly cold morning of 18 January 1871, an assembly comprising the princes of the German
states, representatives of the army, important Prussian ministers including the chief minister Otto
von Bismarck gathered in the unheated Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles to proclaim the
new German Empire headed by Kaiser William I of Prussia.

The nation-building process in Germany had demonstrated the dominance of Prussian state power. The
new state placed a strong emphasis on modernising the currency, banking, legal and judicial systems
in Germany. Prussian measures and practices often became a model for the rest of Germany.

Kaiser and the chief commander of the Prussian army, General von Roon. Near them is Bismarck. This
monumental work (2.7m x 2.7m) was completed and presented by the artist to Bismarck on the latter’s
70th birthday in 1885.