6 Market for Goods



We have seen how British manufacturers attempted to take over the Indian market, and how Indian
weavers and craftsmen, traders and industrialists resisted colonial controls, demanded tariff
protection, created their own spaces, and tried to extend the market for their produce.

But when new products are produced people have to be persuaded to buy them. They have to feel like
using the product.

How was this done? One way in which new consumers are created is through advertisements. As you
know, advertisements make products appear desirable and necessary. They try to shape the minds of
people and walls, television screens. But if we look back into history we find that from the very
beginning of the industrial age, advertisements have played a part in expanding the markets for
products, and in shaping a new consumer culture.

When Manchester industrialists began selling cloth in India, they put labels on the cloth bundles.
The label was needed to make the place of manufacture and the name of the company familiar to the
buyer.

The label was also to be a mark of quality. When buyers saw ‘MADE IN MANCHESTER’ written in bold on
the label, they were expected to feel confident about buying the cloth.

Images of numerous Indian gods and goddesses – Kartika, Lakshmi, Saraswati – are shown in imported
cloth labels approving the quality of the product being marketed.

Historic figures are used to create respect for the product.

The image of baby Krishna was most commonly used to popularise baby products.

But labels did not only carry words and texts. They also carried images and were very often
beautifully illustrated. If we look at these old labels, we can have some idea of the mind of the
manufacturers, their calculations, and the way they appealed to the people.

Images of Indian gods and goddesses regularly appeared on these labels. It was as if the association
with gods gave divine approval to the goods being sold. The imprinted image of Krishna or Saraswati
was also intended to make the manufacture from a foreign land appear somewhat familiar to Indian
people.

By the late nineteenth century, manufacturers were printing calendars to popularise their products.
Unlike newspapers and magazines, calendars were used even by people who could not read. They were
hung in tea shops and in poor people’s homes just as much as in offices and middle-class apartments.
And those who hung the calendars had to see the advertisements, day after day, through the year. In
these calendars, once again, we see the figures of gods being used to sell new products.

Like the images of gods, figures of important personages, of emperors and nawabs, adorned
advertisement and calendars. The message very often seemed to say: if you respect the royal figure,
then respect this product; when the product was being used by kings, or produced under royal
command, its quality could not be questioned.

When Indian manufacturers advertised the nationalist message was clear and loud. If you care for the
nation then buy products that Indians produce. Advertisements became a vehicle of the nationalist
message of swadeshi.

Conclusion Clearly, the age of industries has meant major technological changes, growth of
factories, and the making of a new industrial labour force. However, as you have seen, hand
technology and small-scale production remained an important part of the industrial landscape.

Look again at Figs. 1 and 2. What would you now say of the images they project? from across the
skies. in an Ahmedabad mill, and asking people to use things made in India.

Why did some industrialists in nineteenth-century Europe prefer hand labour over machines? 2.

How did the East India Company procure regular supplies of cotton and silk textiles from Indian
weavers? 3. 4.

Why did industrial production in India increase during the First World War? Select any one industry
in your region and find out its history. How has the technology changed? Where do the workers come
from? How are the products advertised and marketed? Try and talk to the employers and some workers
to get their views about the industry’s history. b) In the seventeenth century merchants from towns
in Europe began employing peasants and artisans within the villages. c) The port of Surat declined
by the end of the eighteenth century. d) The East India Company appointed gomasthas to supervise
weavers in India. 2.

Write True or False against each statement: a) At the end of the nineteenth century, 80 per cent of
the total workforce in Europe was employed in the technologically advanced industrial sector. b) The
international market for fine textiles was dominated by India till the eighteenth century. c) The
American Civil War resulted in the reduction of cotton exports from India. d) The introduction of
the fly shuttle enabled handloom workers to improve their productivity. 3.