How can parties be reformed?



In order to face these challenges, political parties need to be reformed.

The question is: Are political parties willing to reform? If they are willing, what has prevented
them from reforming so far? If they are not willing, is it possible to force them to reform?
Citizens all over the world face this question. This is not a simple question to answer. In a
democracy, the final decision is made by leaders who represent political parties. People can replace
them, but only by another set of party leaders. If all of them do not wish to reform, how can anyone
force them to change? Let us look at some of the recent efforts and suggestions in our country to
reform political parties and its leaders:  The Constitution was amended to prevent elected MLAs and
MPs from changing parties. This was done because many elected representatives were indulging in
defection in order to become ministers or for cash rewards. Now the law says that if Defection:
Changing party allegiance from the party on which a person got elected (to a legislative body) to a
different party.

Can you identify which of the challenges described in this section are being highlighted in these
cartoons (on pages 57 to 59)? What are the ways to curb the misuse of money and muscle power in
politics? Does this people contest elections only to make money? But isn’t it true that there are
politicians committed to the well-being of the people? © Manjul - DNA De moc ra tic Polit ics any
MLA or MP changes parties, he or she will lose the seat in the legislature. This new law has helped
bring defection down. At the same time, this has made any dissent even more difficult. MPs and MLAs
have to accept whatever the party leaders decide.  The Supreme Court passed an order to reduce the
influence of money and criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to
file an affidavit giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him.

The new system has made a lot of information available to the public.

But there is no system to check if the information given by the candidates is true. As yet we do not
know if it has led to decline in the influence of the rich and the criminals.  The Election
Commission passed an order making it necessary for political parties to hold their organisational
elections and file their income tax returns. The parties have started doing so but sometimes it is
mere formality. It is not clear if this step has led to greater internal democracy in political
parties.

Besides these, many suggestions are often made to reform political parties:  A law should be made
to regulate the internal affairs of political parties.

It should be made compulsory for political parties to maintain a register of its members, to follow
its own constitution, to have an independent authority, to act as a judge in case of party disputes,
to hold open elections to the highest posts.  It should be made mandatory for political parties to
give a minimum number of tickets, about one-third, to women candidates. Similarly, there should be a
quota for women in the decision making bodies of the party.  There should be state funding of
elections. The government should give parties money to support their election expenses. This support
could be given in kind: petrol, paper, telephone, etc. Or it could be given in cash on the basis of
the votes secured by the party in the last election.

These suggestions have not yet been accepted by political parties. If and when these are accepted
these could lead to some improvement.

But we must be very careful about legal solutions to political problems.

Over-regulation of political parties can be counter-productive. This would force all parties to find
ways to cheat the law. Besides, political parties will not agree to pass a law that they do not
like.

There are two other ways in which political parties can be reformed. One, people can put Affidavit:
A signed document submitted to an officer, where a person makes a sworn statement regarding her
personal information.

Do you agree that this form of reforming political parties will be acceptable to them? © Keshav -
The Hindu Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Exercises pressure on political parties. This can be done through
petitions, publicity and agitations. Ordinary citizens, pressure groups and movements and the media
can play an important role in this. If political parties feel that they would lose public support by
not taking up reforms, they would become more serious about reforms.

Two, political parties can improve if those who want this, join political parties. The quality of
democracy depends on the degree of public participation. It is difficult to reform politics if
ordinary citizens do not take part in it and simply criticise it from the outside. The problem of
bad politics can be solved by more and better politics. We shall return to this theme in the final
chapter. 1. State the various functions political parties perform in a democracy. 2. What are the
various challenges faced by political parties? 3. Suggest some reforms to strengthen parties so that
they perform their functions well? 4. What is a political party? 5. What are the characteristics of
a political party? 6. A group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the
government is called a _____________________. 7. Match List I (organisations and struggles) with
List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: 8. Who among the
following is the founder of the Bahujan Samaj Party? A. Kanshi Ram B. Sahu Maharaj C. B.R. Ambedkar
D. Jotiba Phule 9. What is the guiding philosophy of the Bharatiya Janata Party? A. Bahujan Samaj B.
Revolutionary democracy C. Integral humanism D. Modernity (a) (b) (c) (d) List I List II 1.

Congress Party A. National Democratic Alliance 2.

Bharatiya Janata Party B. State party 3.

Communist Party of India (Marxist) C. United Progressive Alliance 4.

Telugu Desam Party D. Left Front De moc ra tic Polit ics Exercises 10. Consider the following
statements on parties.

A. Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people.

B. Parties are often rocked by scandals involving top party leaders.

C. Parties are not necessary to run governments.

Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B, and C (b) A and B (c) B and C (d) A and C
11.        Read the following passage and answer the questions given below: Muhammad Yunus is a
famous economist of Bangladesh.

He received several international honours for his efforts to promote economic and social development
for the benefit of the poor. He and the Grameen Bank that he started jointly, received the Nobel
Peace Prize for the year 2006. In February 2007, he decided to launch a political party and contest
in the parliamentary elections. His objective was to foster proper leadership, good governance and
build a new Bangladesh.

He felt that only a political party different from the traditional ones would bring about new
political culture. His party would be democratic from the grassroots level.

The launching of the new party, called Nagarik Shakti (Citizens’ Power), has caused a stir among the
Bangladeshis.

While many welcomed his decision, some did not like it. “Now I think Bangladesh will have a chance
to choose between good and bad and eventually have a good government,” said Shahedul Islam, a
government official. “That government, we hope, would not only keep itself away from corruption but
also make fighting corruption and black money a top priority.” But leaders of traditional political
parties who dominated the country’s politics for decades were apprehensive. “There was no debate
(over him) winning the Nobel, but politics is different – very challenging and often controversial,”
said a senior leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. Some others were highly critical. They
asked why he was rushing into politics. “Is he being planted in politics by mentors from outside the
country,” asked one political observer.

Do you think Yunus made a right decision to float a new political party? Do you agree with the
statements and fears expressed by various people? How do you want this new party organised to make
it different from other parties? If you were the one to begin this political party, how would you
defend it?