2.3 Late nineteenth-century Colonialism



Trade flourished and markets expanded in the late nineteenth century. But this was not only a period
of expanding trade and increased prosperity. It is important to realise that there was a darker side
to this process. In many parts of the world, the expansion of trade and a closer relationship with
the world economy also meant a loss of freedoms and livelihoods. Late- nineteenth-century European
conquests produced many painful economic, social and ecological changes through which the colonised
societies were brought into the world economy.

News, 1851.

Cattle were traded at fairs, brought by farmers for sale. One of the oldest livestock markets in
London was at Smithfield. In the mid- nineteenth century a huge poultry and meat market was
established near the railway line connecting Smithfield to all the meat-supplying centres of the
country.

Export of meat was possible only after ships were refrigerated.

The Making of a Global World straight, as if they were drawn using a ruler. Well, in fact this was
almost how rival European powers in Africa drew up the borders demarcating their respective
territories. In 1885 the big European powers met in Berlin to complete the carving up of Africa
between them.

Britain and France made vast additions to their overseas territories in the late nineteenth century.
Belgium and Germany became new colonial powers. The US also became a colonial power in the late
1890s by taking over some colonies earlier held by Spain.

Let us look at one example of the destructive impact of colonialism on the economy and livelihoods
of colonised people.

Sir Henry Morton Stanley in Central Africa Stanley was a journalist and explorer sent by the New
York Herald to find Livingston, a missionary and explorer who had been in Africa for several years.
Like other European and American explorers of the time, Stanley went with arms, mobilised local
hunters, warriors and labourers to help him, fought with local tribes, investigated African
terrains, and mapped different regions.

These explorations helped the conquest of Africa. Geographical explorations were not driven by an
innocent search for scientific information. They were directly linked to imperial projects.