6 Nationalism and Imperialism



By the last quarter of the nineteenth century nationalism no longer retained its idealistic liberal-
democratic sentiment of the first half of the century, but became a narrow creed with limited ends.
During this period nationalist groups became increasingly intolerant of each other and ever ready to
go to war. The major European powers, in turn, manipulated the nationalist aspirations of the
subject peoples in Europe to further their own imperialist aims.

The most serious source of nationalist tension in Europe after 1871 was the area called the Balkans.
The Balkans was a region of geographical and ethnic variation comprising modern-day Romania,
Bulgaria, Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Croatia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Slovenia, Serbia and Montenegro
whose inhabitants were broadly known as the Slavs. A large part of the Balkans was under the control
of the Ottoman Empire. The spread of the ideas of romantic nationalism in the Balkans together with
the disintegration of the Ottoman Empire made this region very explosive. All through the nineteenth
century the Ottoman Empire had sought to strengthen itself through modernisation and internal
reforms but with very little success. One by one, its European subject nationalities broke away from
its control and declared independence. The Balkan peoples based their claims for independence or
political rights on nationality and used history to prove that they had once been independent but
had subsequently been subjugated by foreign powers. Hence the rebellious nationalities in the
Balkans thought of their struggles as attempts to win back their long-lost independence.

As the different Slavic nationalities struggled to define their identity and independence, the
Balkan area became an area of intense conflict.

The Balkan states were fiercely jealous of each other and each hoped to gain more territory at the
expense of the others. Matters were further complicated because the Balkans also became the scene of
big power rivalry. During this period, there was intense rivalry among the European powers over
trade and colonies as well as naval and military might. These rivalries were very evident in the way
the Balkan problem unfolded. Each power – Russia, Germany, England, Austro-Hungary – was keen on
countering the hold of other powers over the Balkans, and extending its own control over the area.
This led to a series of wars in the region and finally the First World War.

Nationalism in Europe Nationalism, aligned with imperialism, led Europe to disaster in 1914.

But meanwhile, many countries in the world which had been colonised by the European powers in the
nineteenth century began to oppose imperial domination. The anti-imperial movements that developed
everywhere were nationalist, in the sense that they all struggled to form independent nation-states,
and were inspired by a sense of collective national unity, forged in confrontation with imperialism.
European ideas of nationalism were nowhere replicated, for people everywhere developed their own
specific variety of nationalism. But the idea that societies should be organised into ‘nation-
states’ came to be accepted as natural and universal. symbol of the British nation — is triumphantly
sitting over the globe. The colonies are represented through images of tigers, elephants, forests
and primitive people. The domination of the world is shown as the basis of Britain’s national pride.
2.

Choose three examples to show the contribution of culture to the growth of nationalism in Europe. 3.

Through a focus on any two countries, explain how nations developed over the nineteenth century. 4.

How was the history of nationalism in Britain unlike the rest of Europe? 5.

Why did nationalist tensions emerge in the Balkans? different from European examples? Write a note
on: a) Guiseppe Mazzini b) Count Camillo de Cavour c) The Greek war of independence d) Frankfurt
parliament e) The role of women in nationalist struggles 2.

What steps did the French revolutionaries take to create a sense of collective identity among the
French people? 3.

Who were Marianne and Germania? What was the importance of the way in which they were portrayed? 4.

Briefly trace the process of German unification. 5.

What changes did Napoleon introduce to make the administrative system more efficient in the
territories ruled by him?