Belgium and Sri Lanka



I have a simple equation in mind.

Sharing power = dividing power = weakening the country. Why do we start by talking of this? Ethnic:
A social division based on shared culture. People belonging to the same ethnic group believe in
their common descent because of similarities of physical type or of culture or both. They need not
always have the same religion or nationality.

Belgium is a small country in Europe, smaller in area than the state of Haryana. It has borders with
France, the Netherlands, Germany and Luxembourg. It has a population of a little over one crore,
about half the population of Haryana. The ethnic composition of this small country is very complex.
Of the country’s total population, 59 per cent lives in the Flemish region and speaks Dutch
language. Another 40 per cent people live in the Wallonia region and speak French. Remaining one per
cent of the Belgians speak German. In the capital city Brussels, 80 per cent people speak French
while 20 per cent are Dutch-speaking.

The minority French-speaking community was relatively rich and powerful. This was resented by the
Dutch-speaking community who got the benefit of economic development and education much later. This
led to tensions between the Dutch- speaking and French-speaking communities during the 1950s and
1960s. The tension between the two communities was more acute in Brussels. Brussels presented a
special problem: the Dutch-speaking people constituted a majority in the country, but a minority in
the capital.

Let us compare this to the situation in another country. Sri Lanka is an island nation, just a few
kilometres off the southern coast of Tamil Nadu. It has about two crore people, about the same as in
Haryana. Like other nations in the South Asia region, Sri Lanka has a diverse population. The major
social groups are the Sinhala-speakers (74 per cent) and the Tamil-speakers (18 per cent). Among
Tamils there are two sub-groups. Tamil natives of the country are called ‘Sri Lankan Communities and
regions of Belgium Walloon (French-speaking) Flemish (Dutch-speaking) German-speaking Brussels-
Capital Region communities? © Wikipedia For more details, visit https://www.belgium.be/en Po we r
-sha r ing Ethnic Communities of Sri Lanka Sinhalese Sri Lankan Tamil Indian Tamil Muslim For more
details, visit https://www.gov.lk Tamils’ (13 per cent). The rest, whose forefathers came from India
as plantation workers during colonial period, are called ‘Indian Tamils’.

As you can see from the map, Sri Lankan Tamils are concentrated in the north and east of the
country.

Most of the Sinhala-speaking people are Buddhists, while most of the Tamils are Hindus or Muslims.
There are about 7 per cent Christians, who are both Tamil and Sinhala.

Just imagine what could happen in situations like this. In Belgium, the Dutch community could take
advantage of its numeric majority and force its will on the French and German-speaking population.
This would push the conflict among communities further. This could lead to a very messy partition of
the country; both the sides would claim control over Brussels. In Sri Lanka, the Sinhala community
enjoyed an even bigger majority and could impose its will on the entire country.

Now, let us look at what happened in both these countries.