Why do we need political parties?



Political parties are easily one of the most visible institutions in a democracy. For most ordinary
citizens, democracy is equal to political parties. If you travel to remote parts of our country and
speak to the less educated citizens, you could come across people who may not know anything about
our Constitution or about the nature of our government. But chances are that they would know
something about our political parties. At the same time, this visibility does not mean popularity.
Most people tend to be very critical of political parties.

They tend to blame parties for all that is wrong with our democracy and our political life. Parties
have become identified with social and political divisions.

Therefore, it is natural to ask – do we need political parties at all? About hundred years ago,
there were few countries of the world that had any political party. Now there are few that do not
have parties. Why did political parties become so omnipresent in democracies all over the world? Let
us first answer what political parties are and what they do, before we say why we need them.

Meaning A political party is a group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power
in the government. They agree on some policies and programmes for the society with a view to promote
the collective good. Since there can be different views on what is good for So, you agree with me.
Parties are partial, partisan and lead to partitions.

Parties do nothing but divide people.

That is their real function! Election Commission has officially banned wall writing by parties
during election times. Most political parties argue that was the cheapest way for their campaign.
These election times used to (1) (2) (3) (4) © (1) M Govarthan (2) A Muralidharan (3) M Moorthy (4)
T Singaravelou, The Hindu De moc ra tic Polit ics Partisan: A person who is strongly committed to a
party, group or faction. Partisanship is marked by a tendency to take a side and inability to take a
balanced view on an issue. © RK Laxman - Brushing up the years all, parties try to persuade people
why their policies are better than others. They seek to implement these policies by winning popular
support through elections.

Thus, parties reflect fundamental political divisions in a society. Parties are about a part of the
society and thus, involve partisanship. Thus, a party is known by which part it stands for, which
policies it supports and whose interests it upholds. A political party has three components:  the
leaders,  the active members and  the followers Functions offices and exercise political power.

Parties do so by performing a series of functions: 1 Parties contest elections. In most democracies,
elections are fought mainly among the candidates put up by political parties. Parties select their
candidates in different ways.

In some countries, such as the USA, members and supporters of a party choose its candidates. Now
more and more countries are following this method. In other countries like India, top party leaders
choose candidates for contesting elections. 2 Parties put forward different policies and programmes
and the voters choose from them. Each of us may have different opinions and views on what policies
are suitable for the society. But no government can handle such a large variety of views. In a
democracy, a large number of similar opinions have to be grouped together to provide a direction in
which policies can be formulated by the governments.

This is what the parties do. A party reduces a vast multitude of opinions into a few basic positions
which it Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Okay, granted that we can’t live without political parties.

But tell me on what grounds do people support a political party? supports. A government is expected
to base its policies on the line taken by the ruling party. 3 Parties play a decisive role in making
laws for a country.

Formally, laws are debated and passed in the legislature. But since most of the members belong to a
party, they go by the direction of the party leadership, irrespective of their personal opinions. 4
Parties form and run governments.

As we noted last year, the big policy decisions are taken by political executive that comes from the
political parties. Parties recruit leaders, train them and then make them ministers to run the
government in the way they want. 5 Those parties that lose in the elections play the role of
opposition to the parties in power, by voicing different views and criticising government for its
failures or wrong policies. Opposition parties also mobilise opposition to the government. 6 Parties
shape public opinion.

They raise and highlight issues.

Parties have lakhs of members and activists spread all over the country.

Many of the pressure groups are the extensions of political parties among different sections of
society. Parties sometimes also launch movements for the resolution of problems faced by people.
Often opinions in the society crystallise on the lines parties take. 7 Parties provide people access
to government machinery and welfare schemes implemented by governments. For an ordinary citizen it
is easy to approach a local party leader than a government officer.

That is why, they feel close to parties even when they do not fully trust them. Parties have to be
responsive to people’s needs and demands.

Otherwise people can reject those parties in the next elections.

Necessity This list of functions in a sense answers the question asked above: we need political
parties because they perform all these functions.

But we still need to ask why modern democracies cannot exist without political parties. We can
understand the necessity of political parties by imagining a situation without parties.

Every candidate in the elections will be independent. So no one will be able to make any promises to
the people about any major policy changes. The government may be formed, but its utility will remain
ever uncertain. Elected representatives will be accountable to their constituency for what they do
in the locality. But no one will be responsible for how the country will be run.

We can also think about it by looking at the non-party based elections to the panchayat in many
states. Although, the parties do not contest formally, it is generally noticed that the village gets
split into more than one faction, each of which puts up a ‘panel’ of its candidates.

This is exactly what the party does.

That is the reason we find political parties in almost all countries of the world, whether these
countries are big or small, old or new, developed or developing.

The rise of political parties is directly linked to the emergence of representative democracies.

Ruling Party: Political party that runs government.

De moc ra tic Polit ics As we have seen, large societies need representative democracy.

As societies became large and complex, they also needed some agency to gather different views on
various issues and to present these to the government. They needed some ways, to bring various
representatives together so that a Categorise these photographs by the functions of political
parties they illustrate. Find one photograph or news clipping from your own area for each of the
functions listed above. responsible government could be formed. They needed a mechanism to support
or restrain the government, make policies, justify or oppose them. Political parties fulfill these
needs that every representative government has. We can say that parties are a necessary condition
for a democracy.