4.1 The Early Entrepreneurs



Industries were set up in different regions by varying sorts of people.

Let us see who they were.

The history of many business groups goes back to trade with China.

From the late eighteenth century, as you have read in your book last year, the British in India
began exporting opium to China and took tea from China to England. Many Indians became junior
players in this trade, providing finance, procuring supplies, and shipping consignments. Having
earned through trade, some of these businessmen had visions of developing industrial enterprises in
India.

In Bengal, Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in the China trade before he turned to industrial
investment, setting up six joint-stock companies in the 1830s and 1840s. Tagore’s enterprises sank
along with those of others in the wider business crises of the 1840s, but later in the nineteenth
century many of the China traders became successful industrialists. In Bombay, Parsis like Dinshaw
Petit and Jamsetjee Nusserwanjee Tata who built huge industrial empires in India, accumulated their
initial wealth partly from exports to China, and partly from raw cotton shipments to England. Seth
Hukumchand, a Marwari businessman who set up the first Indian jute mill in Calcutta in 1917, also
traded with China. So did the father as well as grandfather of the famous industrialist G.D. Birla.

Capital was accumulated through other trade networks. Some merchants from Madras traded with Burma
while others had links with the Middle East and East Africa. There were yet other develop through
westernisation and industrialisation. He invested in shipping, shipbuilding, mining, banking,
plantations and insurance. many others of his time, he was involved in the China trade and shipping.
He owned a large fleet of ships, but competition from English and American shippers forced him to
sell his ships by the 1850s.

The Age of Industrialisation commercial groups, but they were not directly involved in external
trade. They operated within India, carrying goods from one place to another, banking money,
transferring funds between cities, and financing traders. When opportunities of investment in
industries opened up, many of them set up factories.

As colonial control over Indian trade tightened, the space within which Indian merchants could
function became increasingly limited.

They were barred from trading with Europe in manufactured goods, and had to export mostly raw
materials and food grains – raw cotton, opium, wheat and indigo – required by the British. They were
also gradually edged out of the shipping business.

Till the First World War, European Managing Agencies in fact controlled a large sector of Indian
industries. Three of the biggest ones were Bird Heiglers & Co., Andrew Yule, and Jardine Skinner &
Co. These Agencies mobilised capital, set up joint-stock companies and managed them. In most
instances Indian financiers provided the capital while the European Agencies made all investment and
business decisions. The European merchant-industrialists had their own chambers of commerce which
Indian businessmen were not allowed to join.