7 Religious Reform and Public Debates



From the early nineteenth century, as you know, there were intense debates around religious issues.
Different groups confronted the changes happening within colonial society in different ways, and
offered a variety of new interpretations of the beliefs of different religions. Some criticised
existing practices and campaigned for reform, while others countered the arguments of reformers.
These debates were carried out in public and in print. Printed tracts and newspapers not only spread
the new ideas, but they shaped the nature of the debate. A wider public could now participate in
these public discussions and express their views. New ideas emerged through these clashes of
opinions.

This was a time of intense controversies between social and religious reformers and the Hindu
orthodoxy over matters like widow immolation, monotheism, Brahmanical priesthood and idolatry. In
Bengal, as the debate developed, tracts and newspapers proliferated, circulating a variety of
arguments. To reach a wider audience, the ideas were printed in the everyday, spoken language of
ordinary people. Rammohun Roy published the Sambad Kaumudi from 1821 and the Hindu orthodoxy
commissioned the Samachar Chandrika to oppose his opinions. From 1822, two Persian newspapers were
published, Jam-i-Jahan Nama and Shamsul Akhbar. In the same year, a Gujarati newspaper, the Bombay
Samachar, made its appearance.

In north India, the ulama were deeply anxious about the collapse of Muslim dynasties. They feared
that colonial rulers would encourage conversion, change the Muslim personal laws. To counter this,
they used cheap lithographic presses, published Persian and Urdu translations of holy scriptures,
and printed religious newspapers and tracts. The Deoband Seminary, founded in 1867, published
thousands upon thousands of fatwas telling Muslim readers how to conduct themselves in their
everyday lives, and appeared, each with a different interpretation of faith, each keen on enlarging
its following and countering the influence of its opponents. Urdu print helped them conduct these
battles in public.

Among Hindus, too, print encouraged the reading of religious texts, especially in the vernacular
languages. The first printed edition of ( a body of Islamic law) Fatwa – A legal pronouncement on
Islamic law usually given by a mufti (legal scholar) to clarify issues on which the law is uncertain
the Ramcharitmanas of Tulsidas, a sixteenth-century text, came out from Calcutta in 1810. By the
mid-nineteenth century, cheap lithographic editions flooded north Indian markets. From the 1880s,
the Naval Kishore Press at Lucknow and the Shri Venkateshwar Press in Bombay published numerous
religious texts in vernaculars.

In their printed and portable form, these could be read easily by the faithful at any place and
time. They could also be read out to large groups of illiterate men and women.

Religious texts, therefore, reached a very wide circle of people, encouraging discussions, debates
and controversies within and among different religions.

Print did not only stimulate the publication of conflicting opinions amongst communities, but it
also connected communities and people in different parts of India. Newspapers conveyed news from one
place to another, creating pan-Indian identities.

Why Newspapers? ‘Krishnaji Trimbuck Ranade inhabitant of Poona intends to publish a Newspaper in the
Marathi Language with a view of affording useful information on every topic of local interest. It
will be open for free discussion on subjects of general utility, scientific investigation and the
speculations connected with the antiquities, statistics, curiosities, history and geography of the
country and of the Deccan especially… the patronage and support of all interested in the diffusion
of knowledge and Welfare of the People is earnestly solicited.’ Bombay Telegraph and Courier, 6
January 1849 ‘The task of the native newspapers and political associations is identical to the role
of the Opposition in the House of Commons in Parliament in England. That is of critically examining
government policy to suggest improvements, by removing those parts that will not be to the benefit
of the people, and also by ensuring speedy implementation.

These associations ought to carefully study the particular issues, gather diverse relevant
information on the nation as well as on what are the possible and desirable improvements, and this
will surely earn it considerable influence.’ Native Opinion, 3 April 1870.