3.1 The Romantic Imagination and National Feeling



The development of nationalism did not come about only through wars and territorial expansion.
Culture played an important role in creating the idea of the nation: art and poetry, stories and
music helped express and shape nationalist feelings.

Let us look at Romanticism, a cultural movement which sought to develop a particular form of
nationalist sentiment. Romantic artists and poets generally criticised the glorification of reason
and science painters. This huge painting (4.19m x 3.54m) depicts an incident in which 20,000 Greeks
were said to have been killed by Turks on the island of Chios. By dramatising the incident, focusing
on the suffering of women and children, and using vivid colours, Delacroix sought to appeal to the
emotions of the spectators, and create sympathy for the Greeks. and focused instead on emotions,
intuition and mystical feelings.

Their effort was to create a sense of a shared collective heritage, a common cultural past, as the
basis of a nation.

Other Romantics such as the German philosopher Johann Gottfried Herder (1744-1803) claimed that true
German culture was to be discovered among the common people – das volk. It was through folk songs,
folk poetry and folk dances that the true spirit of the nation (volksgeist) was popularised. So
collecting and recording these forms of folk culture was essential to the project of nation-
building.

Nationalism in Europe The Grimm Brothers: Folktales and Nation-building Grimms’ Fairy Tales is a
familiar name. The brothers Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm were born in the German city of Hanau in 1785
and 1786 respectively. While both of them studied law, they soon developed an interest in collecting
old folktales. They spent six years travelling from village to village, talking to people and
writing down fairy tales, which were handed down through the generations. These were popular both
among children and adults. In 1812, they published their first collection of tales.

Subsequently, both the brothers became active in liberal politics, especially the movement for
freedom of the press. In the meantime they also published a 33-volume dictionary of the German
language.

The Grimm brothers also saw French domination as a threat to German culture, and believed that the
folktales they had collected were expressions of a pure and authentic German spirit. They considered
their projects of collecting folktales and developing the German language as part of the wider
effort to oppose French domination and create a German national identity.

The emphasis on vernacular language and the collection of local folklore was not just to recover an
ancient national spirit, but also to carry the modern nationalist message to large audiences who
were mostly illiterate. This was especially so in the case of Poland, which had been partitioned at
the end of the eighteenth century by the Great Powers – Russia, Prussia and Austria. Even though
Poland no longer existed as an independent territory, national feelings were kept alive through
music and language. Karol Kurpinski, for example, celebrated the national struggle through his
operas and music, turning folk dances like the polonaise and mazurka into nationalist symbols.

Language too played an important role in developing nationalist sentiments. After Russian
occupation, the Polish language was forced out of schools and the Russian language was imposed
everywhere.

In 1831, an armed rebellion against Russian rule took place which was ultimately crushed. Following
this, many members of the clergy in Poland began to use language as a weapon of national resistance.

Polish was used for Church gatherings and all religious instruction.

As a result, a large number of priests and bishops were put in jail or sent to Siberia by the
Russian authorities as punishment for their refusal to preach in Russian. The use of Polish came to
be seen as a symbol of the struggle against Russian dominance.