Caste and politics



We have seen two instances of the expression of social divisions in the arena of politics, one
largely positive and the other largely negative. Let us turn to our final case, that of caste and
politics, that has both positive and the negative aspects.

Caste inequalities Unlike gender and religion, caste division is special to India. All societies
have some kind of social inequality and some form of division of labour.

In most societies, occupations are passed on from one generation to another. Caste system is an
extreme form of this. What makes it different from other societies is that in this system,
hereditary occupational division was sanctioned by rituals.

Members of the same caste group were supposed to form a social community that practiced the same or
similar occupation, married within the caste group and did not eat with members from other
caste groups.

Caste system was based on exclusion of and discrimination against the ‘outcaste’ groups. They were
subjected to the inhuman practice of untouchability about which you have studied in Class IX. That
is why political leaders and social reformers like Jotiba Phule, Gandhiji, B.R. Ambedkar and Periyar
Ramaswami Naicker advocated and worked to establish a society in which caste inequalities are
absent.

Partly due to their efforts and partly due to other socio-economic changes, castes and caste system
in modern India have undergone great changes. With economic d e v e l o p m e n t , l a r g e s c a
l e urbanisation, growth of literacy and education, occupational mobility and the weakening of the
position of landlords in the villages, the old notions of caste hierarchy are breaking down. Now,
most of the Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e Social and Religious Diversity of India The Census of
India records the religion of each and every Indian after every ten years.

The person who fills the Census form visits every household and records the religion of each member
of that household exactly the way each person describes it. If someone says she has ‘no religion’ or
that he is an ‘atheist’, this is exactly how it is recorded.

Thus we have reliable information on the proportion of different religious communities in the
country and how it has changed over the years. The pie chart below presents the population
proportion of six major religious communities in the country. Since Independence, the total
population of each community has increased substantially but their proportion in the country’s
population has not changed much. In percentage terms, the population of the Hindus, Jains and
Christians has declined marginally since 1961.

The proportion of Muslim, Sikh and Buddhist population has increased slightly. There is a common but
mistaken impression that the proportion of the Muslims in the country’s population is going to
overtake other religious communities. Expert estimates done for the Prime Minister’s High Level
Committee (popularly known as Sachar Committee) show that the proportion of the Muslims is expected
to go up a little, by about 3 to 4 per cent, in the next 50 years. It proves that in overall terms,
the population balance of different religious communities is not likely to change in a big way.

The same is true of the major caste groups. The Census of India counts two social groups: the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Both these broad groups include hundreds of castes or
tribes whose names are listed in an official Schedule.

Hence the prefix ‘Scheduled’ in their name. The Scheduled Castes, commonly known as Dalits, include
those that were previously regarded as ‘outcaste’ in the Hindu social order and were subjected to
exclusion and untouchability. The Scheduled Tribes, often referred to as Adivasis, include those
communities that led a secluded life usually in hills and forests and did not interact much with the
rest of society. In 2011, the Scheduled Castes were 16.6 per cent and the Scheduled Tribes were 8.6
per cent of the country’s population.

The Census does not yet count the Other Backward Classes, the group we discussed in Class IX. Hence
there are some differences about their proportion in the country’s population.

The National Sample Survey of 2004–05 estimates their population to be around 41 per cent. Thus the
SC, ST and the OBC together account for about two-thirds of the country’s population and about
three-fourths of the Hindu population.

Population of different religious communities in India, 2011 Hindu 79.8 Muslim 14.2 Others 2%
Christian 2.3 Sikh 1.7 Others include Buddhist 0.7% Jain 0.4% Other Religions and Persuasions 0.7%
Religion not stated 0.2% De moc ra tic Polit ics times, in urban areas it does not matter much who
is walking along next to us on a street or eating at the next table in a restaurant. The
Constitution of India prohibited any caste-based discrimination and laid the foundations of policies
to reverse the injustices of the caste system. If a person who lived a century ago were to return to
India, she would be greatly surprised at the change that has come about in the country.

Yet caste has not disappeared from contemporary India. Some of the older aspects of caste have
persisted. Even now most people marry within their own caste or tribe. Untouchability has not ended
completely, despite constitutional prohibition. Effects of centuries of advantages and disadvantages
continue to be felt today. The caste groups that had access to education under the old system have
done very well in acquiring modern education as well. Those groups that did not have access to
education or were prohibited from acquiring it have naturally lagged behind. That is why there is a
disproportionately large presence of ‘upper caste’ among the urban middle classes in our country.
Caste continues to be closely linked to economic status. (See Plus Box on Page 41.) Caste in
politics As in the case of communalism, casteism is rooted in the belief that caste is the sole
basis of social community. According to this way of thinking, people belonging to the same caste
belong to a natural social community and have the same interests which they do not share with anyone
from another caste. As we saw in the case of communalism, such a belief is not borne out by our
experience. Caste is one aspect of our experience but it is not the only relevant or the most
important aspect.

Caste can take various forms in politics:  When parties choose candidates in elections, they keep
in mind the caste composition of the electorate and nominate candidates from different castes so as
to muster necessary support to win elections.

When governments are formed, political parties usually take care that representatives of different
castes and tribes find a place in it.  Political parties and candidates in elections make appeals
to caste sentiment to muster support. Some political parties are known to favour some castes and are
seen as their representatives.  Universal adult franchise and the principle of one-person-one-vote
Urbanisation: Shift of population from rural areas to urban areas.

Occupational mobility: Shift from one occupation to another, usually when a new generation takes up
occupations other than those practiced by their ancestors.

Caste hierarchy: A ladder-like formation in which all the caste groups are placed from the ‘highest’
to the ‘lowest’ castes.

I don’t care what my caste is. Why are we discussing all this in the textbook? Are we not promoting
casteism by talking about caste? Now you don’t like it! Didn’t you tell me that wherever there is
domination, we should discuss it in Political Science? Will caste disappear if we keep mum about it?
Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e Caste inequality today Caste is an important source of economic
inequality because it regulates access to resources of various kinds. For example, in the past, the
so-called ‘untouchable’ castes were denied the right to own land, while only the so-called ‘twice
born’ castes had the right to education. Although this kind of explicit and formalised inequality
based on caste is now outlawed, the effects of centuries of accumulated advantages and disadvantages
continue to be felt. Moreover, new kinds of inequalities have also developed.

The relationship between caste and economic status has certainly changed a lot. Today, it is
possible to find very rich and very poor people in every caste, whether ‘low’ or ‘high’. This was
not true even twenty or thirty years ago – it was very rare indeed to find rich people among the
‘lowest’ castes. However, as this evidence from the National Sample Survey shows, caste continues to
be very strongly linked to economic status in many important ways:  The average economic status
(measured by criteria like monthly consumption expenditure) of caste groups still follows the old
hierarchy – the ‘upper’ castes are best off, the Dalits and Adivasis are worst off, and the backward
classes are in between.  Although every caste has some poor members, the proportion living in
extreme poverty (below the official ‘poverty line’) is much higher for the lowest castes and much
lower for the upper castes, with the backward classes once again in between.  Although every caste
has some members who are rich, the upper castes are heavily over-represented among the rich while
the lower castes are severely under-represented.

Percentage of population living below the poverty line, 1999–—–——2000 Caste and Community groups
Rural Urban Scheduled Tribes 45.8 35.6 Scheduled Castes 35.9 38.3 Other Backward Classes 27.0 29.5
Muslim Upper Castes 26.8 34.2 Hindu Upper Castes 11.7 9.9 Christian Upper Castes 9.6 5.4 Sikh Upper
Castes 0.0 4.9 Other Upper Castes 16.0 2.7 All Groups 27.0 23.4 Note: ‘Upper Caste’ here means those
who are not from SC, ST, or OBC. Below the poverty line means those who spent `327 or less per
person per month in rural and `454 or less per person per month in urban areas. compelled political
leaders to gear up to the task of mobilising and securing political support. It also brought new
consciousness among the people of castes that were hitherto treated as inferior and low.

The focus on caste in politics can sometimes give an impression that elections are all about caste
and nothing else. That is far from true.

Just consider these:  No parliamentary constituency in the country has a clear majority of one
single caste. So, every candidate and party needs to win the confidence of more than one caste and
community to win elections.  No party wins the votes of all the voters of a caste or community.

When people say that a caste is a ‘vote bank’ of one party, it usually means that a large proportion
of the voters from that caste vote for that party.  Many political parties may put up candidates
from the same caste (if that caste is believed to dominate the electorate in a particular
constituency). Some voters have more than one candidate from their caste while many voters have no
candidate from their caste.  The ruling party and the sitting MP or MLA frequently lose elections
in our country. That could not have happened if all castes and communities were frozen in their
political preferences.

Clearly, while caste matters in electoral politics, so do many other factors. The voters have strong
attachment to political parties which is often stronger than their attachment to their caste or
community. People within the same caste or community have different interests depending on their
economic condition. Rich and poor or men and women from the same caste often vote very differently.
People’s assessment of the performance of the government and the popularity rating of the leaders
matter and are often decisive in elections.

Politics in caste We have so far looked at what caste does to politics. But it does not mean that
there is only a one-way relation between caste and politics. Politics too influences the caste
system and caste identities by bringing them into the political arena. Thus, it is not politics that
gets caste-ridden, it © Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons Do you think that political
leaders are right to treat people belonging to a caste as ‘vote banks’? Ge nde r , R elig io n and C
ast e is the caste that gets politicised. This takes several forms:  Each caste group tries to
become bigger by incorporating within it neighbouring castes or sub-castes which were earlier
excluded from it.  Various caste groups are required to enter into a coalition with other castes or
communities and thus enter into a dialogue and negotiation.  New kinds of caste groups have come up
in the political arena like ‘backward’ and ‘forward’ caste groups.

Thus, caste plays different kinds of roles in politics. In some situations, expression of caste
differences in politics gives many disadvantaged communities the space to demand their share of
power. In this sense, caste politics has helped people from Dalits and OBC castes to gain better
access to decision making. Several political and non-political organisations have been demanding and
agitating for an end to discrimination against particular castes, for more dignity and more access
to land, resources and opportunities.

At the same time, exclusive attention to caste can produce negative results as well. As in the case
of religion, politics based on caste identity alone is not very healthy in a democracy. It can
divert attention from other pressing issues like poverty, development and corruption. In some cases,
caste division leads to tensions, conflict and even violence.

De moc ra tic Polit ics 1. Mention different aspects of life in which women are discriminated or
disadvantaged in India. 2. State different forms of communal politics with one example each. 3.
State how caste inequalities are still continuing in India. 4. State two reasons to say that caste
alone cannot determine election results in India. 5. What is the status of women’s representation in
India’s legislative bodies? 6. Mention any two constitutional provisions that make India a secular
state. 7. When we speak of gender divisions, we usually refer to: (a)       Biological difference
between men and women (b) Unequal roles assigned by the society to men and women (c)      Unequal
child sex ratio (d)     Absence of voting rights for women in democracies 8. In India seats are
reserved for women in (a)       Lok Sabha (b)   State legislative assemblies (c)        Cabinets (d)
Panchayati Raj bodies 9. Consider the following statements on the meaning of communal politics.
Communal politics is based on the belief that: A. One religion is superior to that of others.

B. People belonging to different religions can live together happily as equal citizens.

C. Followers of a particular religion constitute one community.

D. State power cannot be used to establish the domination of one religious group over others.

Which of the statements are correct? (a) A, B, C, and D (b) A, B, and D (c) A and C (d) B and D 10.
Which among the following statements about India’s Constitution is wrong? It (a)        prohibits
discrimination on grounds of religion. (b)    gives official status to one religion. (c)
provides to all individuals freedom to profess any religion. (d)        ensures equality of citizens
within religious communities. 11.  Social divisions based on _________ are peculiar to India.

Exercises Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e Exercises List I List II 1.

A person who believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men A. Communalist 2.

A person who says that religion is the principal basis of community B. Feminist 3.

A person who thinks that caste is the principal basis of community C. Secularist 4.

A person who does not discriminate others on the basis of religious beliefs D. Castiest (a) (b) (c)
(d) 12.     Match List I with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the
Lists: