1.3 Conquest, Disease and Trade



The pre-modern world shrank greatly in the sixteenth century after European sailors found a sea
route to Asia and also successfully crossed the western ocean to America. For centuries before, the
Indian Ocean had known a bustling trade, with goods, people, knowledge, customs, etc. criss-crossing
its waters. The Indian subcontinent was central to these flows and a crucial point in their
networks. The entry of the Europeans helped expand or redirect some of these flows towards Europe.

Before its ‘discovery’, America had been cut off from regular contact with the rest of the world for
millions of years. But from the sixteenth century, its vast lands and abundant crops and minerals
began to transform trade and lives everywhere.

Precious metals, particularly silver, from mines located in present- day Peru and Mexico also
enhanced Europe’s wealth and financed its trade with Asia. Legends spread in seventeenth-century
Europe about South America’s fabled wealth. Many expeditions set off in search of El Dorado, the
fabled city of gold.

The Portuguese and Spanish conquest and colonisation of America was decisively under way by the mid-
sixteenth century. European conquest was not just a result of superior firepower. In fact, the most
powerful weapon of the Spanish conquerors was not a conventional military weapon at all. It was the
germs such as those of smallpox that they carried on their person. Because of their long isolation,
America’s original inhabitants had no immunity against these diseases that came from Europe.
Smallpox in particular proved a deadly killer. Once introduced, it spread deep into the continent,
ahead even of any Europeans reaching there. It killed and decimated whole communities, paving the
way for conquest.

Hungry children digging for potatoes in a field that has already been harvested, hoping to discover
some leftovers. During the Great Irish Potato Famine (1845 to 1849), around 1,000,000 people died of
starvation in Ireland, and double the number emigrated in search of work. ‘Biological’ warfare? John
Winthorp, the first governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony in New England, wrote in May 1634 that
smallpox signalled God’s blessing for the colonists: ‘… the natives … were neere (near) all dead of
small Poxe (pox), so as the Lord hathe (had) cleared our title to what we possess’.

Alfred Crosby, Ecological Imperialism.

But not diseases such as smallpox to which the conquerors were mostly immune.

Until the nineteenth century, poverty and hunger were common in Europe. Cities were crowded and
deadly diseases were widespread.

Religious conflicts were common, and religious dissenters were persecuted. Thousands therefore fled
Europe for America. Here, by the eighteenth century, plantations worked by slaves captured in Africa
were growing cotton and sugar for European markets.

Until well into the eighteenth century, China and India were among the world’s richest countries.
They were also pre-eminent in Asian trade. However, from the fifteenth century, China is said to
have restricted overseas contacts and retreated into isolation. China’s reduced role and the rising
importance of the Americas gradually moved the centre of world trade westwards. Europe now emerged
as the centre of world trade. established beliefs and practices children along with four women and
seven men in top hats and suit waiting to be sold. To attract buyers, slaves were often dressed in
their best clothes.

The Making of a Global World The world changed profoundly in the nineteenth century. Economic,
political, social, cultural and technological factors interacted in complex ways to transform
societies and reshape external relations.

Economists identify three types of movement or ‘flows’ within international economic exchanges. The
first is the flow of trade which in the nineteenth century referred largely to trade in goods (e.g.,
cloth or wheat). The second is the flow of labour – the migration of people in search of employment.
The third is the movement of capital for short-term or long-term investments over long distances.

All three flows were closely interwoven and affected peoples’ lives more deeply now than ever
before. The interconnections could sometimes be broken – for example, labour migration was often
more restricted than goods or capital flows. Yet it helps us understand the nineteenth-century world
economy better if we look at the three flows together.