5 Visualising the Nation



While it is easy enough to represent a ruler through a portrait or a statue, how does one go about
giving a face to a nation? Artists in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries found a way out by
personifying a nation. In other words they represented a country as if it were a person. Nations
were then portrayed as female figures.

The female form that was chosen to personify the nation did not stand for any particular woman in
real life; rather it sought to give the abstract idea of the nation a concrete form. That is, the
female female allegory to portray ideas such as Liberty, Justice and the Republic. These ideals were
represented through specific objects or symbols. As you would remember, the attributes of Liberty
are the red cap, or the broken chain, while Justice is generally a blindfolded woman carrying a pair
of weighing scales.

Similar female allegories were invented by artists in the nineteenth century to represent the
nation. In France she was christened Marianne, a popular Christian name, which underlined the idea
of a people’s nation. Her characteristics were drawn from those of Liberty and the Republic – the
red cap, the tricolour, the cockade. Statues of Marianne were erected in public squares to remind
the public of the national symbol of unity and to persuade them to identify with it. Marianne images
were marked on coins and stamps.

Similarly, Germania became the allegory of the German nation. In visual representations, Germania
wears a crown of oak leaves, as the German oak stands for heroism. freedom, liberty) is expressed
through a person or a thing. An allegorical story has two meanings, one literal and one symbolic
cotton banner, as it was meant to hang from the ceiling of the Church of St Paul where the Frankfurt
parliament was convened in March 1848.

Attribute Significance Broken chains Being freed Breastplate with eagle Symbol of the German empire
– strength Crown of oak leaves Heroism Sword Readiness to fight Olive branch around the sword
Willingness to make peace Black, red and gold tricolour Flag of the liberal-nationalists in 1848,
banned by the Dukes of the German states Rays of the rising sun Beginning of a new era With the help
of the chart in Box 3, identify the attributes of Veit’s Germania and interpret the symbolic meaning
of the painting.

In an earlier allegorical rendering of 1836, Veit had portrayed the Kaiser’s crown at the place
where he has now located the broken chain. Explain the significance of this change. on Germania’s
sword reads: ‘The German sword protects the German Rhine.’ Look once more at Fig. 10. Imagine you
were a citizen of Frankfurt in March 1848 and were present during the proceedings of the parliament.
How would you (a) as a man seated in the hall of deputies, and (b) as a woman observing from the
galleries, relate to the banner of Germania hanging from the ceiling?