8.1 Women and Print



Lives and feelings of women began to be written in particularly vivid and intense ways. Women’s
reading, therefore, increased enormously in middle-class homes. Liberal husbands and fathers began
educating their womenfolk at home, and sent them to schools when women’s schools were set up in the
cities and towns after the mid-nineteenth century. Many journals began carrying writings by women,
and explained why women should be educated. They also carried a syllabus and attached suitable
reading matter which could be used for home-based schooling.

But not all families were liberal. Conservative Hindus believed that a literate girl would be
widowed and Muslims feared that educated women would be corrupted by reading Urdu romances.

Sometimes, rebel women defied such prohibition. We know the story of a girl in a conservative Muslim
family of north India who secretly learnt to read and write in Urdu. Her family wanted her to read
only the Arabic Quran which she did not understand.

So she insisted on learning to read a language that was her own. In East Bengal, in the early
nineteenth century, Rashsundari Debi, a young married girl in a very orthodox household, learnt to
read in the secrecy of her kitchen. Later, she wrote her autobiography Amar Jiban which was
published in 1876. It was the first full-length autobiography published in the Bengali language.

Since social reforms and novels had already created a great interest in women’s lives and emotions,
there was also an interest in what women would have to say about their own lives. From the 1860s, a
few Bengali women like Kailashbashini Debi wrote books highlighting the experiences of women – about
how women were imprisoned at home, kept in ignorance, forced to do hard domestic labour and treated
unjustly by the very people they served. In the 1880s, in present-day Maharashtra, Tarabai Shinde
and Pandita Ramabai wrote with passionate anger about the miserable lives of upper-caste Hindu
women, especially widows. A woman in a Tamil novel expressed what reading meant to women who were so
greatly confined by social regulations: ‘For various reasons, my world is small … More than half my
life’s happiness has come from books …’ While Urdu, Tamil, Bengali and Marathi print culture had
developed early, Hindi printing began seriously only from the 1870s. Soon, a large segment of it was
devoted to the education of women. In journals of caricature and satire published in the late
nineteenth century.

Notice that the imperial British figure is positioned right at the centre. He is authoritative and
imperial; telling the natives what is to be done. The natives sit on either side of him, servile and
submissive. The Indians are being shown a copy of Punch, the British journal of cartoons and satire.
You can almost hear the British master say – ‘This is the model, produce Indian versions of it.’
noted educationist and literary figure, strongly condemned men for withholding education from women
in the name of religion as she addressed the Bengal Women’s Education Conference: ‘The opponents of
female education say that women will become unruly … Fie! They call themselves Muslims and yet go
against the basic tenet of Islam which gives Women an equal right to education. If men are not led
astray once educated, why should women?’ Print Culture the early twentieth century, journals,
written for and sometimes edited by women, became extremely popular. They discussed issues like
women’s education, widowhood, widow remarriage and the national movement. Some of them offered
household and fashion lessons to women and brought entertainment through short stories and
serialised novels.

In Punjab, too, a similar folk literature was widely printed from the early twentieth century. Ram
Chaddha published the fast-selling Istri Dharm Vichar to teach women how to be obedient wives.

The Khalsa Tract Society published cheap booklets with a similar message. Many of these were in the
form of dialogues about the qualities of a good woman.

In Bengal, an entire area in central Calcutta – the Battala – was devoted to the printing of popular
books. Here you could buy cheap editions of religious tracts and scriptures, as well as literature
that was considered obscene and scandalous. By the late nineteenth century, a lot of these books
were being profusely illustrated with woodcuts and coloured lithographs. Pedlars took the Battala
publications to homes, enabling women to read them in their leisure time. woodcut.

The image shows the artist’s fear that the cultural impact of the West has turned the family upside
down.

Notice that the man is playing the veena while the woman is smoking a hookah. The move towards
women’s education in the late nineteenth century family roles. nineteenth century.

The artist’s vision of the destruction of proper family relations. Here the husband is totally
dominated by his wife who is perched on his shoulder.

He is cruel towards his mother, dragging her like an animal, by the noose.