Nationalism in Europe



In 1848, Frédéric Sorrieu, a French artist, prepared a series of four prints visualising his dream
of a world made up of ‘democratic and social Republics’, as he called them. The first print (Fig. 1)
of the series, shows the peoples of Europe and America – men and women of all ages and social
classes – marching in a long train, and offering homage to the statue of Liberty as they pass by it.
As you would recall, artists of the time of the French Revolution personified Liberty as a female
figure – here you can recognise the torch of Enlightenment she bears in one hand and the Charter of
the Rights of Man in the other. On the earth in the foreground of the image lie the shattered
remains of the symbols of absolutist institutions. In Sorrieu’s utopian vision, the peoples of the
world are grouped as distinct nations, identified through their flags and national costume. Leading
the procession, way past the statue of Liberty, are the United States and Switzerland, which by this
time were already nation-states. France, T h e R i s e o f N a t i o n a l i s m i n E u ro p e
Chapter I The Rise of Nationalism in Europe system of rule that has no restraints on the power
exercised. In history, the term refers to a form of monarchical government that was centralised,
militarised and repressive Utopian – A vision of a society that is so ideal that it is unlikely to
actually exist She is followed by the peoples of Germany, bearing the black, red and gold flag.
Interestingly, at the time when Sorrieu created this image, the German peoples did not yet exist as
a united nation – the flag they carry is an expression of liberal hopes in 1848 to unify the
numerous German-speaking principalities into a nation-state under a democratic constitution.
Following the German peoples are the peoples of Austria, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy,
Poland, England, Ireland, Hungary and Russia. From the heavens above, Christ, saints and angels gaze
upon the scene. They have been used by the artist to symbolise fraternity among the nations of the
world.

This chapter will deal with many of the issues visualised by Sorrieu in Fig. 1. During the
nineteenth century, nationalism emerged as a force which brought about sweeping changes in the
political and mental world of Europe. The end result of these changes was the emergence of the
nation-state in place of the multi-national dynastic empires of Europe. The concept and practices of
a modern state, in which a centralised power exercised sovereign control over a clearly defined
territory, had been developing over a long period of time in Europe. But a nation-state was one in
which the majority of its citizens, and not only its rulers, came to develop a sense of common
identity and shared history or descent. This commonness did not exist from time immemorial; it was
forged through struggles, through the actions of leaders and the common people. This chapter will
Ernst Renan, ‘What is a Nation?’ In a lecture delivered at the University of Sorbonne in 1882, the
French philosopher Ernst Renan (1823-92) outlined his understanding of what makes a nation. The
lecture was subsequently published as a famous essay entitled ‘Qu’est-ce qu’une nation?’ (‘What is a
Nation?’).

In this essay Renan criticises the notion suggested by others that a nation is formed by a common
language, race, religion, or territory: ‘A nation is the culmination of a long past of endeavours,
sacrifice and devotion. A heroic past, great men, glory, that is the social capital upon which one
bases a national idea. To have common glories in the past, to have a common will in the present, to
have performed great deeds together, to wish to perform still more, these are the essential
conditions of being a people. A nation is therefore a large-scale solidarity … Its existence is a
daily plebiscite … A province is its inhabitants; if anyone has the right to be consulted, it is the
inhabitant. A nation never has any real interest in annexing or holding on to a country against its
will. The existence of nations is a good thing, a necessity even. Their existence is a guarantee of
liberty, which would be lost if the world had only one law and only one master.’ important? people
of a region are asked to accept or reject a proposal Nationalism in Europe