Economic growth and development



If democracies are expected to produce good governments, then is it not fair to expect that they
would also produce development? Evidence shows that in practice, many democracies did not fulfil
this expectation.

If you consider all democracies and all dictatorships for the fifty years between 1950 and 2000,
dictatorships have slightly higher rate of economic growth. The inability of democracy to achieve
higher economic development worries us.

But this alone cannot be reason to reject democracy. As you have already studied in economics,
economic development depends on several factors: country’s population The Rich Get Buff size, global
situation, cooperation from other countries, economic priorities adopted by the country, etc.
However, the difference in the rates of economic development between less developed countries with
dictatorships and democracies is negligible. Overall, we cannot say that democracy is a guarantee of
economic development. But we can expect democracy not to lag behind dictatorships in this respect.

When we find such significant difference in the rates of economic growth between countries under
dictatorship and democracy, it is better to prefer democracy as it has several other positive
outcomes. © RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Cartoon on this page and next three pages tell us about the disparities between the rich and poor.
Should the gains of economic growth be evenly distributed? How can the poor get a voice for a better
share in a nation? What can the poor countries do to receive a greater share in the world’s wealth?
De moc ra tic Polit ics Arguments about democracy tend to be very passionate. This is how it should
be, for democracy appeals to some of our deep values. These debates cannot be resolved in a simple
manner. But some debates about democracy can and should be resolved by referring to some facts and
figures. The debate about the economic outcomes of democracy is one such debate. Over the years,
many students of democracy have gathered careful evidence to see what the relationship of democracy
with economic growth and economic inequalities is.

The tables and the cartoon here present some of the evidences:  Table 1 shows that on an average
dictatorial regimes have had a slightly better record of economic growth. But when we compare their
record only in poor countries, there is virtually no difference.  Table 2 shows that within
democracies there can be very high degree of inequalities.

In democratic countries like South Africa and Brazil, the top 20 per cent people take away more than
60 per cent of the national income, leaving less than 3 per cent for the bottom 20 per cent
population. Countries like Denmark and Hungary are much better in this respect.  You can see in the
cartoon, there is often inequality of opportunities available to the poorer sections.

What would be your verdict on democracy if you had to base it purely on economic performance of
democratic regimes in terms of growth and equal distribution? Table 1 Rates of economic growth for
different countries, 1950 – 2000 Table 2 Inequality of income in selected countries Type of regimes
and countries Growth Rate All democratic regimes 3.95 All dictatorial regimes 4.42 Poor countries
under dictatorship 4.34 Poor countries under democracy 4.28 Name of the Countries % share of
national income Top 20 % Bottom 20 % South Africa 64.8 2.9 Brazil 63.0 2.6 Russia 53.7 4.4 50.0 4.0
United Kingdom 45.0 6.0 Denmark 34.5 9.6 Hungary 34.4 10.0 Cambridge, Cambridge University Press,
2000.

Poor Kids democracy Economic outcomes of © Jimmy Margulies - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Out co me s o f De mo crac y