3.1 A New Reading Public



With the printing press, a new reading public emerged. Printing reduced the cost of books. The time
and labour required to produce each book came down, and multiple copies could be produced with
greater ease. Books flooded the market, reaching out to an ever-growing readership.

Access to books created a new culture of reading. Earlier, reading was restricted to the elites.
Common people lived in a world of oral culture. They heard sacred texts read out, ballads recited,
and folk tales narrated. Knowledge was transferred orally. People collectively heard a story, or saw
a performance. As you will see in Chapter 8, they did not read a book individually and silently.
Before the age of print, books were not only expensive but they could not be produced in sufficient
numbers. Now books could reach out to wider sections of people. If earlier there was a hearing
public, now a reading public came into being.

But the transition was not so simple. Books could be read only by the literate, and the rates of
literacy in most European countries were very low till the twentieth century. How, then, could
publishers persuade the common people to welcome the printed book? To do this, they had to keep in
mind the wider reach of the printed work: even those who did not read could certainly enjoy
listening to books being read out. So printers began publishing popular ballads and folk tales, and
such books would be profusely illustrated with pictures.

These were then sung and recited at gatherings in villages and in taverns in towns.

Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally transmitted. The line that separated
the oral and reading cultures became blurred. And the hearing public and reading public became
intermingled. verse, usually sung or recited Taverns – Places where people gathered to drink
alcohol, to be served food, and to meet friends and exchange news You are a bookseller advertising
the availability of new cheap printed books. Design a poster for your shop window. movement to
reform the Catholic Church dominated by Rome. Martin Luther was one of the main Protestant
reformers. Several traditions of anti-Catholic Christianity developed out of the movement