3.5 India and the Great Depression



If we look at the impact of the depression on India we realise how integrated the global economy had
become by the early twentieth century. The tremors of a crisis in one part of the world were quickly
relayed to other parts, affecting lives, economies and societies worldwide.

In the nineteenth century, as you have seen, colonial India had become an exporter of agricultural
goods and importer of manufactures.

The depression immediately affected Indian trade. India’s exports 1938. Courtesy: Library of
Congress, Prints and Photographs Division.

When an unemployment census showed 10 million people out of work, the local government in many US
states began making small allowances to the unemployed. These long queues came to symbolise the
poverty and unemployment of the depression years.

The Making of a Global World grow more jute, brothers, with the hope of greater cash.

Costs and debts of jute will make your hopes get dashed.

When you have spent all your money and got the crop off the ground, … traders, sitting at home, will
pay only Rs 5 a maund. and imports nearly halved between 1928 and 1934. As international prices
crashed, prices in India also plunged. Between 1928 and 1934, wheat prices in India fell by 50 per
cent.

Peasants and farmers suffered more than urban dwellers. Though agricultural prices fell sharply, the
colonial government refused to reduce revenue demands. Peasants producing for the world market were
the worst hit.

Consider the jute producers of Bengal. They grew raw jute that was processed in factories for export
in the form of gunny bags. But as gunny exports collapsed, the price of raw jute crashed more than
60 per cent. Peasants who borrowed in the hope of better times or to increase output in the hope of
higher incomes faced ever lower prices, and fell deeper and deeper into debt. Thus the Bengal jute
growers’ lament: Across India, peasants’ indebtedness increased. They used up their savings,
mortgaged lands, and sold whatever jewellery and precious metals they had to meet their expenses. In
these depression years, India became an exporter of precious metals, notably gold.

The famous economist John Maynard Keynes thought that Indian gold exports promoted global economic
recovery. They certainly helped speed up Britain’s recovery, but did little for the Indian peasant.

Rural India was thus seething with unrest when Mahatma Gandhi launched the civil disobedience
movement at the height of the depression in 1931.

The depression proved less grim for urban India. Because of falling prices, those with fixed incomes
– say town-dwelling landowners who received rents and middle-class salaried employees – now found
themselves better off. Everything cost less. Industrial investment also grew as the government
extended tariff protection to industries, under the pressure of nationalist opinion.

Who profits from jute cultivation according to the jute growers’ lament? Explain.