1 The Pre-modern World



When we talk of ‘globalisation’ we often refer to an economic system that has emerged since the last
50 years or so. But as you will see in this chapter, the making of the global world has a long
history – of trade, of migration, of people in search of work, the movement of capital, and much
else. As we think about the dramatic and visible signs of global interconnectedness in our lives
today, we need to understand the phases through which this world in which we live has emerged.

All through history, human societies have become steadily more interlinked. From ancient times,
travellers, traders, priests and pilgrims travelled vast distances for knowledge, opportunity and
spiritual fulfilment, or to escape persecution. They carried goods, money, values, skills, ideas,
inventions, and even germs and diseases.

As early as 3000 BCE an active coastal trade linked the Indus valley civilisations with present-day
West Asia. For more than a millennia, cowries (the Hindi cowdi or seashells, used as a form of
currency) from the Maldives found their way to China and East Africa. The long-distance spread of
disease-carrying germs may be traced as far back as the seventh century. By the thirteenth century
it had become an unmistakable link.

The Making of a Global World Chapter III The Making of a Global World From the ninth century, images
of ships appear regularly in memorial stones found in the western coast, indicating the significance
of oceanic trade.

A good place to start is the changing pattern of food production and consumption in industrial
Europe. Traditionally, countries liked to be self-sufficient in food. But in nineteenth-century
Britain, self-sufficiency in food meant lower living standards and social conflict. Why was this so?
Population growth from the late eighteenth century had increased the demand for food grains in
Britain. As urban centres expanded and industry grew, the demand for agricultural products went up,
pushing up food grain prices. Under pressure from landed groups, the government also restricted the
import of corn. The laws allowing the government to do this were commonly known as the ‘Corn Laws’.
Unhappy with high food prices, industrialists and urban dwellers forced the abolition of the Corn
Laws.

After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported into Britain more cheaply than it could be
produced within the country.

British agriculture was unable to compete with imports. Vast areas of land were now left
uncultivated, and thousands of men and women were thrown out of work. They flocked to the cities or
migrated overseas.