3 Towards Civil Disobedience



In February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement. He felt the
movement was turning violent in many places and satyagrahis needed to be properly trained before
they would be ready for mass struggles. Within the Congress, some leaders were by now tired of mass
struggles and wanted to participate in elections to the provincial councils that had been set up by
the Government of India Act of 1919. They felt that it was important to oppose British policies
within the councils, argue for reform and also demonstrate that these councils were not truly
democratic. C. R. Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Swaraj Party within the Congress to argue for a
return to council politics. But younger leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose
pressed for more radical mass agitation and for full independence.

In such a situation of internal debate and dissension two factors again shaped Indian politics
towards the late 1920s. The first was the effect of the worldwide economic depression. Agricultural
prices began to fall from 1926 and collapsed after 1930. As the demand for agricultural goods fell
and exports declined, peasants found it difficult to sell their harvests and pay their revenue. By
1930, the countryside was in turmoil.

Against this background the new Tory government in Britain constituted a Statutory Commission under
Sir John Simon. Set up in response to the nationalist movement, the commission was to look into the
functioning of the constitutional system in India and suggest changes. The problem was that the
commission did not have a single Indian member. They were all British.

When the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928, it was greeted with the slogan ‘Go back Simon’.
All parties, including the Congress and the Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations.

In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer of
‘dominion status’ for India in an unspecified future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a
future constitution. This did not satisfy the Congress leaders. The radicals within the Congress,
led by Patel (extreme left), Jawaharlal Nehru (extreme right) and Subhas Chandra Bose (fifth from
right).

Lala Lajpat Rai was assaulted by the British police during a peaceful demonstration against the
Simon Commission. He succumbed to injuries that were inflicted on him during the demonstration.

Nationalism in India Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose, became more assertive.

The liberals and moderates, who were proposing a constitutional system within the framework of
British dominion, gradually lost their influence. In December 1929, under the presidency of
Jawaharlal Nehru, the Lahore Congress formalised the demand of ‘Purna Swaraj’ or full independence
for India. It was declared that 26 January 1930, would be celebrated as the Independence Day when
people were to take a pledge to struggle for complete independence. But the celebrations attracted
very little attention. So Mahatma Gandhi had to find a way to relate this abstract idea of freedom
to more concrete issues of everyday life.