4.2 Italy Unified



Like Germany, Italy too had a long history of political fragmentation.

Italians were scattered over several dynastic states as well as the multi-national Habsburg Empire.
During the middle of the nineteenth century, Italy was divided into seven states, of which only one,
Sardinia-Piedmont, was ruled by an Italian princely house.

The north was under Austrian Habsburgs, the centre was ruled by the Pope and the southern regions
were under the domination of the Bourbon kings of Spain. Even the Italian language had not acquired
one common form and still had many regional and local variations.

During the 1830s, Giuseppe Mazzini had sought to put together a coherent programme for a unitary
Italian Republic. He had also formed a secret society called Young Italy for the dissemination of
his goals. The failure of revolutionary uprisings both in 1831 and 1848 meant that the mantle now
fell on Sardinia-Piedmont under its ruler King Victor Emmanuel II to unify the Italian states
through war. In the eyes of the ruling elites of this region, a unified Italy offered them the
possibility of economic development and political dominance.

Vienna, 5 March 1870. elected deputies of Parliament? What interpretation of democratic processes is
the artist trying to convey? Conquered by Prussia in Austro-Prussia War, 1866 Austrian territories
excluded from German Confederation 1867 Joined with Prussia to form German Confederation, 1867 South
German states joining with Prussia to form German Empire, 1871 Won by Prussia in Franco-Prussia War,
1871 Chief Minister Cavour who led the movement to unify the regions of Italy was neither a
revolutionary nor a democrat. Like many other wealthy and educated members of the Italian elite, he
spoke French much better than he did Italian. Through a tactful diplomatic alliance with France
engineered by Cavour, Sardinia-Piedmont succeeded in defeating the Austrian forces in 1859. Apart
from regular troops, a large number of armed volunteers under the leadership of Giuseppe Garibaldi
joined the fray. In 1860, they marched into South Italy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and
succeeded in winning the support of the local peasants in order to drive out the Spanish rulers. In
1861 Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of united Italy. However, much of the Italian
population, among whom rates of illiteracy were very high, remained blissfully unaware of liberal-
nationalist ideology. The peasant masses who had supported Garibaldi in southern Italy had never
heard of Italia, and believed that ‘La Talia’ was Victor Emmanuel’s wife! regions (seen in Fig 14(a)
become part of a unified Italy. 1858-60