4.3 The Strange Case of Britain



The model of the nation or the nation-state, some scholars have argued, is Great Britain. In Britain
the formation of the nation-state themselves as Italians? last region to join? In which year did the
largest number of states join? result of a long-drawn-out process. There was no British nation prior
to the eighteenth century. The primary identities of the people who inhabited the British Isles were
ethnic ones – such as English, Welsh, Scot or Irish. All of these ethnic groups had their own
cultural and political traditions. But as the English nation steadily grew in wealth, importance and
power, it was able to extend its influence over the other nations of the islands. The English
parliament, which had seized power from the monarchy in 1688 at the end of a protracted conflict,
was the instrument through which a nation-state, with England at its centre, came to be forged. The
Act of Union (1707) between England and Scotland that resulted in the formation of the ‘United
Kingdom of Great Britain’ meant, in effect, that England was able to impose its influence on
Scotland. The British parliament was henceforth dominated by its English members. The growth of a
British identity meant that Scotland’s distinctive culture and political institutions were
systematically suppressed. The Catholic clans that inhabited the Scottish Highlands suffered
terrible repression whenever they attempted to assert their independence. The Scottish Highlanders
were forbidden to speak their Gaelic language or wear their national dress, and large numbers were
forcibly driven out of their homeland.

Ireland suffered a similar fate. It was a country deeply divided between Catholics and Protestants.
The English helped the Protestants of Ireland to establish their dominance over a largely Catholic
country.

Catholic revolts against British dominance were suppressed. After a failed revolt led by Wolfe Tone
and his United Irishmen (1798), Ireland was forcibly incorporated into the United Kingdom in 1801.

A new ‘British nation’ was forged through the propagation of a dominant English culture. The symbols
of the new Britain – the British flag (Union Jack), the national anthem (God Save Our Noble King),
the English language – were actively promoted and the older nations survived only as subordinate
partners in this union. cultural origin or background that a community identifies with or claims The
artist has portrayed Garibaldi as holding on to the base of the boot, so that the King of Sardinia-
Piedmont can enter it from the top. Look at the map of Italy once more. What statement is this
caricature making? most celebrated of Italian freedom fighters. He came from a family engaged in
coastal trade and was a sailor in the merchant navy. In 1833 he met Mazzini, joined the Young Italy
movement and participated in a republican uprising in Piedmont in 1834. The uprising was suppressed
and Garibaldi had to flee to South America, where he lived in exile till 1848. In 1854, he supported
Victor Emmanuel II in his efforts to unify the Italian states. In 1860, Garibaldi led the famous
Expedition of the Thousand to South Italy. Fresh volunteers kept joining through the course of the
campaign, till their numbers grew to about 30,000. They were popularly known as Red Shirts.

In 1867, Garibaldi led an army of volunteers to Rome to fight the last obstacle to the unification
of Italy, the Papal States where a French garrison was stationed. The Red Shirts proved to be no
match for the combined French and Papal troops.

It was only in 1870 when, during the war with Prussia, France withdrew its troops from Rome that the
Papal States were finally joined to Italy. boot named ‘Italy’. English caricature of 1859.

Nationalism in Europe