SECTORS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES



Let us look at these pictures. You will find that people are engaged in various economic activities.
Some of these are activities producing goods. Some others are producing services. These activities
are happening around us every minute even as we speak. How do we understand these activities? One
way of doing this is to group them (classify them) using some important criterion. These groups are
also called sectors.

ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL There are many activities that are undertaken by directly using natural
resources. Take, for example, the cultivation of cotton. It takes place within a crop season. For
the growth of the cotton plant, we depend mainly, but not entirely, on natural factors like
rainfall, sunshine and climate. The product product. Similarly, in the case of an on the biological
process of the animals and availability of fodder etc. The product here, milk, also is a natural
product. Similarly, minerals and ores are also natural products. When we produce a good by
exploiting natural the primary sector. Why primary? This is because it forms the base for all other
products that we subsequently make. Since most of the natural products we get are from agriculture,
dairy, fishing, forestry, this sector is also called agriculture and related sector.

The secondary sector covers activities in which natural products are changed into other forms
through ways of manufacturing that we the next step after primary. The product is not produced by
nature but has to be made and therefore some process of manufacturing is essential. This could be in
a factory, a workshop or at home. For example, using cotton fibre from the plant, we spin yarn and
weave cloth. Using sugarcane as a raw material, we make sugar or gur. We convert earth into bricks
and use bricks to make houses and buildings. Since this sector gradually became associated with the
different kinds of industries that came up, it is also called as industrial sector.

After primary and secondary, there is a third category of activities that falls under tertiary
sector and is different from the above two. These are activities that help in the development of the
primary and secondary sectors.

These activities, by themselves, do not produce a good but they are an aid or a support for the
production process. For example, goods that are produced in the primary or secondary sector would
need to be transported by trucks or trains and then sold in wholesale and retail shops. At times, it
may be necessary to store these in godowns. We also may need to talk to others over telephone or
send letters (communication) or borrow money from banks (banking) to help production and trade.
Transport, storage, communication, banking, trade are some examples of tertiary activities. Since
these activities generate services rather than goods, the tertiary sector is also called the service
sector.

Service sector also includes some essential services that may not directly help in the production of
goods. For example, we require teachers, doctors, and those who provide personal services such as
washermen, barbers, cobblers, lawyers, and people to do administrative and accounting works.

In recent times, certain new services based on information technology such as internet cafe, ATM
booths, call centres, software companies etc have become important.

Tertiary (Service) Sector Primary (Agriculture) Sector Secondary (Industrial) Sector produces
natural goods produces manufactured goods helps to develop other sectors We begin by looking at
different kind of economic activities.

ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E Imagine what would happen if farmers refuse to sell
sugarcane to a particular sugar mill. The mill will have to shut down.

Imagine what would happen to cotton cultivation if companies decide not to buy from the Indian
market and import all cotton they need from other countries. Indian cotton cultivation will become
less profitable and the farmers may even go bankrupt, if they cannot quickly switch to other crops.
Cotton prices will fall.

Farmers buy many goods such as tractors, pumpsets, electricity, pesticides and fertilisers. Imagine
what would happen if the price of fertilisers or pumpsets go up. Cost of cultivation of the farmers
will rise and their profits will be reduced.

People working in industrial and service sectors need food. Imagine what would happen if there is a
strike by transporters and lorries refuse to take vegetables, milk, etc. from rural areas.

Food will become scarce in urban areas whereas farmers will be unable to sell their products. 1.
Complete the above table to show how sectors are dependent on each other. 2. Explain the difference
between primary, secondary and tertiary sectors using examples other than those mentioned in the
text. 3. Classify the following list of occupations under primary, secondary and tertiary sectors:
WHAT DOES THIS SHOW? This is an example of the secondary or industrial sector being dependent on the
primary. • Tailor • Basket weaver • Flower cultivator • Milk vendor • Fishermen • Priest • Courier •
Workers in match factory • Moneylender • Gardener • Potter • Bee-keeper • Astronaut • Call centre
employee 4. Students in a school are often classified into primary and secondary or junior and
senior. What is the criterion that is used? Do you think this is a useful classification? Discuss.

TABLE 2.1 EXAMPLES OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Economic activities, though, are grouped into three
different categories, are highly interdependent. Let us look at some examples.

ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL The various production activities in the primary, secondary and tertiary
sectors produce a very large number of goods and services. Also, the three sectors have a large
number of people working in them to produce these goods and services. The next step, therefore, is
to see how much goods and services are produced and how many people work in each sector. In an
economy there could be one or more sectors which are dominant in terms of total production and
employment, while other sectors are relatively small in size.

How do we count the various goods and services and know the total production in each sector? With so
many thousands of goods and services produced, you might think this is an impossible task! Not only
would the task be enormous, you might also wonder how we can add up cars and computers and nails and
furniture. It won’t make sense!!! You are right in thinking so. To get around this problem,
economists suggest that the values of goods and services should be used rather than adding up the
actual numbers. For example, if 10,000 kgs of wheat is sold at Rs 20 per kg, the value of wheat will
be Rs 2,00,000. The value of 5000 coconuts at Rs 15 per coconut will be Rs 75,000. Similarly, the
value of goods and services in the three sectors are calculated, and then added up.

Remember, there is one precaution one has to take. Not every good (or service) that is produced and
sold needs to be counted. It makes sense only to include the final goods and services. Take, for
instance, a farmer who sells wheat to a flour mill for Rs 20 per kg. The mill grinds the wheat and
sells the flour to a biscuit company for Rs 25 per kg. The biscuit company uses the flour and things
such as sugar and oil to make four packets of biscuits.

It sells biscuits in the market to the consumers for Rs 80 (Rs 20 per packet). Biscuits are the
final goods, i.e., goods that reach the consumers.

Why are only ‘final goods and services’ counted? In contrast to final goods, goods such as wheat and
the wheat flour in this example are intermediate goods. Intermediate goods are used up in producing
final goods and services. The value of final goods already includes the value of all the
intermediate goods that are used in making the final good. Hence, the value of Rs 80 for the
biscuits (final good) already includes the value of flour (Rs 25). Similarly, the value of all other
intermediate goods would have been included. To count the value of the flour and wheat separately is
therefore not correct because then we would be counting the value of the same things a number of
times.

First as wheat, then as flour and finally as biscuits.