What is federalism?



I am confused.

What do we call the Indian government? Is it Union, Federal or Central?

Though only 25 of the world’s 193 countries have federal political systems, their citizens make up
40 per cent of the world’s population. Most of the large countries of the world are federations. Can
you notice an exception to this rule in this map?

Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002 , McGill-Queen’s University
Press, 2002.

Federal political systems Canada United States of America Mexico Pacific Ocean Micronesia Argentina
Venezuela Atlantic Ocean Brazil St. Kitts and Nevis Belgium Switzerland Spain Nigeria Ethiopia
Comoros Bosnia and Herzegovina Austria Pakistan Russia India Malaysia Australia Indian Ocean South
Africa Pacific Ocean United Arab Emirates Germany Let us get back to the contrast between Belgium
and Sri Lanka that we saw in the last chapter. You would recall that one of the key changes made in
the Constitution of Belgium was to reduce the power of the Central Government and to give these
powers to the regional governments.

Regional governments existed in Belgium even earlier. They had their roles and powers. But all these
powers were given to these governments and could be withdrawn by the Central Government. The change
that took place in 1993 was that the regional governments were given constitutional powers that were
no longer dependent on the central government. Thus, Belgium shifted from a unitary to a federal
form of government. Sri Lanka continues to be, for all practical purposes, a unitary system where
the national government has all the powers.

Tamil leaders want Sri Lanka to become a federal system.

Federalism is a system of government in which the power is divided between a central authority and
various constituent units of the country. Usually, a federation has two levels of government. One is
the government for the entire country that is usually responsible for a few subjects of common
national interest. The others are governments at the level of provinces or states that look after
much of the day- to-day administering of their state.

Both these levels of governments enjoy their power independent of the other.

Fe d era lism 15 7 The federal system thus has dual objectives: to safeguard and promote unity of
the country, while at the same time accommodate regional diversity. Therefore, two aspects are
crucial for the institutions and practice of federalism. Governments at different levels should
agree to some rules of power-sharing. They should also trust that each would abide by its part of
the agreement.

An ideal federal system has both aspects : mutual trust and agreement to live together.

The exact balance of power between the central and the state government varies from one federation
to another. This balance depends mainly on the historical context in which the federation was
formed. There are two kinds of routes through which federations have been formed. The first route
involves independent States coming together on their own to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling
sovereignty and retaining identity, they can increase their security. This type of ‘coming together’
federations include the USA, Switzerland and Australia. In this first category of federations, all
the constituent States usually have equal power and are strong vis-à-vis the federal government.

The second route is where a large country decides to divide its power between the constituent States
and the national government.

India, Spain and Belgium are examples of this kind of ‘holding together’ federations. In this second
category, the Central Government tends to be more powerful vis-à- vis the States. Very often
different constituent units of the federation have unequal powers. Some units are granted special
powers.

If federalism works only in big countries, why did Belgium adopt it?

Jurisdiction: The area over which someone has legal authority. The area may be defined in terms of
geographical boundaries or in terms of certain kinds of subjects.

In this sense, federations are contrasted with unitary governments.

Under the unitary system, either there is only one level of government or the sub-units are
subordinate to the central government. The central government can pass on orders to the provincial
or the local government.

But in a federal system, the central government cannot order the state government to do something.
State government has powers of its own for which it is not answerable to the central government.
Both these governments are separately answerable to the people.

Let us look at some of the key features of federalism : 1 There are two or more levels (or tiers) of
government. 2 Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own
jurisdiction in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration. 3 The jurisdictions of
the respective levels or tiers of government are specified in the constitution. So the existence and
authority of each tier of government is constitutionally guaranteed. 4 The fundamental provisions of
the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the
consent of both the levels of government. 5 Courts have the power to interpret the constitution and
the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise
between different levels of respective powers. 6 Sources of revenue for each level of government are
clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy. 16 De moc ra tic Polit ics Isn’t that strange?
Did our constitution makers not know about federalism? Or did they wish to avoid talking about it?
adoption of federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of them said: Khag Raj : I don’t
like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats for different caste groups as in India.

Sarita : Ours in not a very big country. We don’t need federalism.

Babu Lal : I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they get their own state
government.

Ram Ganesh : I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlier If you were
participating in this conversation, what would be your response to each of these? Which of these
reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is?