COMPARING THE THREE SECTORS



...BUT I SHOULD BE PAID THE THAT I PRODUCE ! ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E The
value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and
services The value of final goods and services The value of final goods and services produced in
each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in each sector during a produced in
each sector during a produced in each sector during a particular year provides the total particular
year provides the total particular year provides the total particular year provides the total
particular year provides the total production of the sector for that year. production of the sector
for that year. production of the sector for that year. production of the sector for that year.
production of the sector for that year.

And the sum of production in the different sectors gives what is called the Gross Gross Gross Gross
Gross Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Pr Domestic Product (GDP) oduct (GDP) oduct (GDP)
oduct (GDP) oduct (GDP) of a country. It is the value of all final goods and services produced
within a country within a country within a country within a country within a country during a
particular year. GDP shows how big the economy is.

In India, the mammoth task of measuring GDP is undertaken by a central government ministry. This
Ministry, with the help of various government departments of all the Indian states and union
territories, collects information relating to total volume of goods and services and their prices
and then estimates the GDP.

Recently Indian Government began to bring out the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Value
Added (GVA) in place of the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Domestic Product to be at
par with global practices. The GVA measures the contribution of three sectors of an economy after
adjusting for taxes and subsidies. You will learn more about the GVA and the difference between GDP
and GVA in higher classes. Here we will only understand how goods and services produced in these
three sectors—primary, secondary and tertiary sectors have changed.

Historical Change in Sectors Generally, it has been noted from the histories of many, now developed,
countries that at initial stages of development, primary sector was the most As the methods of
farming changed and agriculture sector began to prosper, it produced much more food than before.

Many people could now take up other activities. There were increasing number of craft-persons and
traders. Buying and selling activities increased many times.

Besides, there were also transporters, administrators, army etc. However, at this stage, most of the
goods produced were natural products from the primary sector and most people were also employed in
this sector.

Over a long time (more than hundred years), and especially because new methods of manufacturing were
introduced, factories came up and started expanding.

Those people who had earlier worked on farms now began to work in factories in large numbers. They
were forced to do so as you read in history chapters. People began to use many more goods that were
produced in factories at cheap rates.

Secondary sector gradually became the most important in total production and employment. Hence, over
time, a shift had taken place. This means that the importance of the sectors had changed.

In the past 100 years, there has been a further shift from secondary to tertiary sector in developed
countries. The service sector has become the most important in terms of total production. Most of
the working people are also employed in the service sector. This is the general pattern observed in
developed countries.

What is the total production and employment in the three sectors in India? Over the years have there
been changes similar to the pattern observed for the developed countries? We shall see in the next
section. 1. What does the history of developed countries indicate about the shifts that have taken
place between sectors? 2. Correct and arrange the important aspects for calculating GDP from this
Jumble.

To count goods and services we add the numbers that are produced. We count all those that were
produced in the last five years. Since we shouldn’t leave out anything we add up all these goods and
services. 3. Discuss with your teacher how you could calculate the total value of a good or service
by using the method of value added at each stage.

ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL Graph shows the production of goods and services in the three sectors.

This is shown for two years, 1977–78 and 2017–18. We have used the data for these two years because
the data are comparable and authentic. You can see how the total production has grown over the forty
years.

PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND TERTIARY looking at the graph: 1. Which was the largest producing sector in
1977–78? 2. Which is the largest producing sector in 2017–18? 3. Can you say which sector has grown
the most over forty years? 4. What was the GDP of India in 2017–18? LET’S WORK THESE Rising
Importance of the Tertiary Sector in Production Over the forty years between 1977–78 and 2017–18,
while production in all the three sectors has increased, it has increased the most in the tertiary
sector.

As a result, in the year 2017–18, the tertiary sector has emerged as the largest producing sector in
India replacing the primary sector.

Why is the tertiary sector becoming so important in India? There could be several reasons.

First, in any country several services such as hospitals, educational institutions, post and
telegraph services, police stations, courts, village administrative offices, municipal corporations,
defence, transport, banks, insurance companies, etc. are required. These can be considered as basic
services.

In a developing country the government has to take responsibility for the provision of these
services.

Second, the development of agriculture and industry leads to the development of services such as
Graph 1: GVA by Primary, Secondary and Tertiary Sectors What does the comparison between 1977–78 and
2017–18 show? What conclusions can we draw from the comparison? Let’s find out. 1977-78 2017-18 Rs.
in crores ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E transport, trade, storage and the like,
as we have already seen. Greater the development of the primary and secondary sectors, more would be
the demand for such services.

Third, as income levels rise, certain sections of people start demanding many more services like
eating out, tourism, shopping, private hospitals, private schools, professional training etc. You
can see this change quite sharply in cities, especially in big cities.

Fourth, over the past decade or so, certain new services such as those based on information and
communication technology have become important and essential. The production of these services has
been rising rapidly. In Chapter 4, we shall see examples of these new services and the reasons for
their expansion.

However, you must remember that not all of the service sector is growing equally well. Service
sector in India employs many different kinds of people. At one end there are a limited number of
services that employ highly skilled and educated workers. At the other end, there are a very large
number of workers engaged in services such as small shopkeepers, repair persons, transport persons,
etc. These people barely manage to earn a living and yet they perform these services because no
alternative opportunities for work are available to them. Hence, only a part of this sector is
growing in importance. You shall read more about this in the next section.

Where are most of the people employed? Graph 2 presents percentage share of the three sectors in
GVA. Now you can directly see the changing importance of the sectors over the forty years.

Graph 2: Share of Sectors in GVA A remarkable fact about India is that while there has been a change
in the share of the three sectors in GVA, a similar shift has not taken place in employment. Graph 3
shows the share of employment in the three sectors in 1977-78 and 2017-18. The primary sector
continues to be the largest employer even now.

Why didn’t a similar shift out of primary sector happen in case of employment? It is because not
enough jobs were created in the secondary and tertiary sectors. Even Graph 3 : Share of Sectors in
Employment (%) 1977-78 2017-18 ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL though industrial output or the
production of goods went up by more than nine times during the period, employment in the industry
went up by around three times. The same applies to the tertiary sector as well. While production in
the service sector rose by 14 times, employment in the service sector rose around five times.

As a result, more than half of the workers in the country are working in the primary sector, mainly
in agriculture, producing only about one sixth of the GVA. In contrast to this, the secondary and
tertiary sectors produce the rest of the produce whereas they employ less about half the people.
Does this mean that the workers in agriculture are not producing as much as they could? What it
means is that there are more people in agriculture than is necessary. So, even if you move a few
people out, production will not be affected. In other words, workers in the agricultural sector are
underemployed.

For instance, take the case of a small farmer, Laxmi, owning about two hectares of unirrigated land
dependent only on rain and growing crops, like jowar and arhar.

All five members of her family work in the plot throughout the year.

Why? They have nowhere else to go for work. You will see that everyone is working, none remains
idle, but in actual fact, their labour effort gets divided. Each one is doing some work but no one
is fully employed. This is the situation of underemployment, where people are apparently working but
all of them are made to work less than their potential. This kind of underemployment is hidden in
contrast to someone who does not have a job and is clearly visible as unemployed. Hence, it is also
called disguised unemployment.

Now, supposing a landlord, Sukhram, comes and hires one or two members of the family to work on his
land. Laxmi’s family is now able to earn some extra income through wages. Since you do not need five
people to look after that small plot, two people moving out does not affect production on their
farm. In the above example, two people may move to work in a factory. Once again the earnings of the
family would increase and they would also continue to produce as much from their land.

There are lakhs of farmers like Laxmi in India. This means that even if we remove a lot of people
from agricultural sector and provide them with proper work elsewhere, agricultural production will
not suffer. The incomes of the people who take up other work would increase the total family income.

This underemployment can also happen in other sectors. For example there are thousands of casual
workers in the service sector in urban areas who search for daily employment. They are employed as
painters, plumbers, repair persons and others doing odd jobs. Many of them don’t find work everyday.
Similarly, we see other people of the service sector on the street pushing a cart or selling
something where they may spend the whole day but earn very little. They are doing this work because
they do not have better opportunities.

ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E How to Create More Employment? From the above
discussion, we can see that there continues to be considerable underemployment in agriculture.

There are also people who are not employed at all. In what ways can one increase employment for
people? Let us look at some of them.

Take the case of Laxmi with her two-hectare plot of unirrigated land.

The government can spend some money or banks can provide a loan, to construct a well for her family
to irrigate the land. Laxmi will then be able to irrigate her land and take a second crop, wheat,
during the rabi season. Let us suppose that one hectare of wheat can provide employment to two
people for 50 days (including sowing, watering, fertiliser TABLE 2.2 SHARE OF PRIMARY SECTOR IN
Share in Gross Value Added (GVA) Share in employment 1. Complete the table using the data given in
Graphs 2 and 3 and answer the question that follows. Ignore if data are not available for some
years.

What are the changes that you observe in the primary sector over a span of forty years? 2. Choose
the correct answer: Underemployment occurs when people (i) do not want to work (ii) are working in a
lazy manner (iii) are working less than what they are capable of doing (iv) are not paid for their
work 3. Compare and contrast the changes in India with the pattern that was observed for developed
countries. What kind of changes between sectors were desired but did not happen in India? 4. Why
should we be worried about underemployment? 1977-78 2017-18 application and harvesting). So, two
more members of the family can be employed in her own field. Now suppose a new dam is constructed
and canals are dug to irrigate many such farms. This could lead to a lot of employment generation
within the agricultural sector itself reducing the problem of underemployment.

Now, suppose Laxmi and other farmers produce much more than before. They would also need to sell
some of this. For this they may be required to transport their products to a nearby town. If the
government invests some money in transportation and storage of crops, or makes better rural roads so
that mini-trucks reach everywhere several farmers like Laxmi, who now have access to water, can
continue to can provide productive employment to not just farmers but also others such as those in
services like transport or trade.

Laxmi’s need is not confined to water alone. To cultivate the land, she also needs seeds,
fertilisers, agricultural equipment and pumpsets to draw water. Being a poor farmer, she cannot
afford many of these. So, she will have to borrow money from moneylenders and pay a high rate of
interest. If the local bank gives her credit at a reasonable rate of interest, she will be able to
buy all these in time and cultivate her land. This means that along with water, we also need to
provide cheap agricultural credit to the farmers for farming to improve. We will look at some of
these needs in Chapter 3, Money and Credit.

Another way by which we can tackle this problem is to identify, promote and locate industries and
services in semi-rural areas where a large number of people may be employed. For instance, suppose
many farmers decide to grow arhar and chickpea (pulse crops). Setting up a dal mill to procure and
process these and sell in the cities is one such example. Opening a cold storage could give an
opportunity for farmers to store their products like potatoes and onions and sell them when the
price is good. In villages near forest areas, we can start honey collection centres where farmers
can come and sell wild honey. It is also possible to set up industries that process vegetables and
agricultural produce like potato, sweet potato, rice, wheat, tomato, fruits, which can be sold in
outside markets.

This will provide employment in industries located in semi-rural areas and not necessarily in large
urban centres.

Do you know that in India about 60 per cent of the population belongs to the age group 5-29 years?
Out of this, only about 51 per cent are attending educational institutions.

The rest and particularly those aged less than 18 years may be at home or What groups of people do
you think are unemployed or underemployed in your area? Can you think of some measures that could be
taken up for them? Gur Making in Haryana ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E in about
625 districts of India. It is called Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005
(MGNREGA 2005). Under MGNREGA 2005, all those who are able to, and are in need of, work in rural
areas are guaranteed 100 days of employment in a year by the government. If the government fails in
its duty to provide employment, it will give unemployment allowances to the people. The types of
work that would in future help to increase the production from land will be given preference under
the Act. many of them may be working as child labourers. If these children are to attend schools, we
will require more buildings, more teachers and other staff. A study conducted by the erstwhile
Planning Commission (now known as NITI Aayog) estimates that nearly 20 lakh jobs can be created in
the education sector alone. Similarly, if we are to improve the health situation, we need many more
doctors, nurses, health workers etc. to work in rural areas. These are some ways by which jobs would
be created and we would also be able to address the important aspects of development talked about in
Chapter 1.

Every state or region has potential for increasing the income and employment for people in that
area.

It could be tourism, or regional craft industry, or new services like IT. Some of these would
require proper planning and support from the government. For example, the same study by the Planning
Commission says that if tourism as a sector is improved, every year we can give additional
employment to more than 35 lakh people.

We must realise that some of the suggestions discussed above would take a long time to implement.
For the short-term, we need some quick measures. Recognising this, the central government in India
made a law implementing the Right to Work 1. Why do you think MGNREGA 2005 is referred to as ‘ Right
to work’ ? 2. Imagine that you are the village head. In that capacity suggest some activities that
you think should be taken up under this Act that would also increase the income of people? Discuss.
3. How would income and employment increase if farmers were provided with irrigation and marketing
facilities? 4. In what ways can employment be increased in urban areas? ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL
Let us examine another way of classifying activities in the economy. This looks at the way people
are employed. What are their conditions of work? Are there any rules and regulations that are
followed as regards their employment? organised because it has some formal processes and procedures.
Some of these people may not be employed by anyone but may work on their own but they too have to
register themselves with the government and follow the rules and regulations.

Workers in the organised sector enjoy security of employment. They are expected to work only a fixed
number of hours. If they work more, they have to be paid overtime by the employer. They also get
several other benefits from the employers. What are Kanta works in the organised sector. Organised
sector covers those enterprises or places of work where the terms of employment are regular and
therefore, people have assured work. They are registered by the government and have to follow its
rules and regulations which are given in various laws such as the Factories Act, Minimum Wages Act,
Payment of Gratuity Act, Shops and Establishments Act etc. It is called DIVISION OF SECTORS AS
ORGANISED AND Kanta Kanta Kanta Kanta Kanta Kanta works in an office. She attends her office from
9.30 a.m. to 5.30 p.m. She gets her salary regularly at the end of every month. In addition to the
salary, she also gets provident fund as per the rules laid down by the government. She also gets
medical and other allowances. Kanta does not go to office on Sundays. This is a paid holiday. When
she joined work, she was given an appointment letter stating all the terms and conditions of work.

Kamal Kamal Kamal Kamal Kamal Kamal is Kanta’s neighbour. He is a daily wage labourer in a nearby
grocery shop. He goes to the shop at 7:30 in the morning and works till 8:00 p.m. in the evening. He
gets no other allowances apart from his wages. He is not paid for the days he does not work. He has
therefore no leave or paid holidays. Nor was he given any formal letter saying that he has been
employed in the shop. He can be asked to leave anytime by his employer.

Do you see the differences in the conditions of work between Kanta and Kamal? ECTORS OF OF OF THE
THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E these benefits? They get paid leave, payment during holidays, provident
fund, gratuity etc. They are supposed to get medical benefits and, under the laws, the factory
manager has to ensure facilities like drinking water and a safe working environment.

When they retire, these workers get pensions as well.

In contrast, Kamal works in the unorganised sector. The unorganised sector is characterised by small
and scattered units which are largely outside the control of the government.

There are rules and regulations but these are not followed. Jobs here are low-paid and often not
regular. There is no provision for overtime, paid leave, holidays, leave due to sickness etc.
Employment is not secure. People can be asked to leave without any reason. When there is less work,
such as during some seasons, some people may be asked to leave. A lot also depends on the whims of
the employer. This sector includes a large number of people who are employed on their own doing
small jobs such as selling on the street or doing repair work. Similarly, farmers work on their own
and hire labourers as and when they require. 1. Look at the following examples. Which of these are
unorganised sector activities? (i) A teacher taking classes in a school (ii) A headload worker
carrying a bag of cement on his back in a market (iii) A farmer irrigating her field (iv) A doctor
in a hospital treating a patient (v) A daily wage labourer working under a contractor (vi) A factory
worker going to work in a big factory (vii) A handloom weaver working in her house 2. Talk to
someone who has a regular job in the organised sector and another who works in the unorganised
sector. Compare and contrast their working conditions in all aspects. 3. How would you distinguish
between organised and unorganised sectors? Explain in your own words. 4. The table below shows the
estimated number of workers in India in the organised and unorganised sectors · What is the
percentage of people in the unorganised sector in agriculture? · · If we look at the country as a
whole, we find that ———% of the workers in India are in the unorganised sector. Organised sector
employment is available to only about ———% of the workers in India.

Sector Organised Unorganised Total Primary Secondary Tertiary Total Total in Percentage 100% TABLE
2.3 WORKERS IN DIFFERENT SECTORS (IN MILLIONS) ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL How to Protect Workers in
the Unorganised Sector? The organised sector offers jobs that are the most sought-after. But the
employment opportunities in the organised sector have been expanding very slowly. It is also common
to find many organised sector enterprises in the unorganised sector. They adopt such strategies to
evade taxes and refuse to follow laws that protect labourers. As a result, a large number of workers
are forced to enter the unorganised sector jobs, which pay a very low salary. They are often
exploited and not paid a fair wage.

Their earnings are low and not regular. These jobs are not secure and have no other benefits.

Since the 1990s, it is also common to see a large number of workers losing their jobs in the
organised sector. These workers are forced to take up jobs in the unorganised sector with low
earnings. Hence, besides the need for more work, there is also a need for protection and support of
the workers in the unorganised sector.

Who are these vulnerable people who need protection? In the rural areas, the unorganised sector
mostly comprises of landless agricultural labourers, small and marginal farmers, sharecroppers and
artisans (such as weavers, blacksmiths, carpenters and goldsmiths). Nearly 80 per cent of rural
households in India are in small and marginal farmer category. These farmers need to be supported
through adequate facility for timely delivery of seeds, agricultural inputs, credit, storage
facilities and marketing outlets.

In the urban areas, unorganised sector comprises mainly of workers in small-scale industry, casual
workers in construction, trade and transport etc., and those who work as street vendors, head load
workers, garment makers, rag pickers etc. Small-scale industry also needs government’s support for
procuring raw material and marketing of output. The casual workers in both rural and urban areas
need to be protected.

We also find that majority of workers from scheduled castes, tribes and backward communities find
themselves in the unorganised sector. Besides getting the irregular and low paid work, these workers
also face social discrimination.

Protection and support to the unorganised sector workers is thus necessary for both economic and
social development.

When factories close down, many once regular workers are found selling goods or pushing a cart or
doing some other odd job ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E Sector Criteria used Most
important Problems indicated and conclusion how they can be tackled Primary, Nature Secondary,
Tertiary Organised, Unorganised LET’S RECALL With so many activities taking place around us, one
needs to use the process of classification to think in a useful manner. The criterion for
classification could be many depending on what we desire to find out.

The process of classification helps to analyse a situation.

In dividing the economic activities into three sectors — primary, the basis of this classification,
we were able to analyse the pattern of total production and employment in India. Similarly, we
divided the economic activities into organised and unorganised and used the classification to look
at employment in the two sectors.

What was the most important conclusion that was derived from the indicated? Can you summarise the
information in the following table? TABLE 2.4 CLASSIFYING ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Another way of
classifying economic activities into sectors could be on the basis of who owns assets and is
responsible for the delivery of services.

In the public sector, the government owns most of the assets and provides all the services. In the
private sector, ownership of assets and delivery of services is in the hands of private individuals
or companies. Railways or post office is an example of the public sector whereas companies like Tata
Iron and Steel Company Limited (TISCO) or Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) are privately owned.

Activities in the private sector are guided by the motive to earn profits.

To get such services we have to pay money to these individuals and companies. The purpose of the
public sector is not just to earn profits.

Governments raise money through taxes and other ways to meet expenses on the services rendered by
it. Modern day governments spend on a whole range of activities. What are these activities? Why do
governments spend on such activities? Let’s find out.

There are several things needed by the society as a whole but which the private sector will not
provide at a reasonable cost. Why? Some of these need spending large sums of money, which is beyond
the capacity SECTORS IN TERMS OF OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL of the private
sector. Also, collecting money from thousands of people who use these facilities is not easy. Even
if they do provide these things they would charge a high rate for their use. Examples are
construction of roads, bridges, railways, harbours, generating electricity, providing irrigation
through dams etc. Thus, governments have to undertake such heavy spending and ensure that these
facilities are available for everyone.

There are some activities, which the government has to support. The private sector may not continue
their production or business unless government encourages it. For example, selling electricity at
the cost of generation may push up the costs of production of goods in many industries. Many units,
especially small-scale units, might have to shut down. Government here steps in by producing and
supplying electricity at rates which these industries can afford. Government has to bear part of the
cost.

Similarly, the Government in India buys wheat and rice from farmers at a ‘fair price’. This it
stores in its godowns and sells at a lower price to consumers through ration shops. You have read
about this in the chapter on Food Security in Class IX. The government has to bear some of the cost.
In this way, the government supports both farmers and consumers.

There are a large number of activities which are the primary responsibility of the government. The
government must spend on these.

Providing health and education facilities for all is one example. We have discussed some of these
issues in the first chapter. Running proper schools and providing quality education, particularly
elementary education, is the duty of the government. India’s size of illiterate population is one of
the largest in the world.

Similarly, we know that nearly half of India’s children are malnourished and a quarter of them are
critically ill. We have read about Infant Mortality Rates. The infant mortality rate of Odisha (36)
or Madhya Pradesh (43) is higher than some of the poorest regions of the world.

Government also needs to pay attention to aspects of human development such as availability of safe
drinking water, housing facilities for the poor and food and nutrition.

It is also the duty of the government to take care of the poorest and most ignored regions of the
country through increased spending in such areas.

SUMMING UP In this chapter we have looked at ways of classifying economic activities into some
meaningful groups. One way of doing this the primary, secondary or tertiary sectors.

The data for India, for the last thirty years, shows that while goods and services produced in the
tertiary sector contribute the most to GDP, the employment remains in the primary sector. We have
also seen what all can be done for increasing employment opportunities in the country.

Another classification is to consider whether people are working in organised or unorganised
sectors. Most people are working in the unorganised sectors and protection is necessary for them. We
also looked at the difference between private and public activities, and why it is important for
public activities to focus on certain areas. 1.

Fill in the blanks using the correct option given in the bracket: (i) Employment in the service
sector _________ increased to the same extent as production. (has / has not) (ii) Workers in the
_________ sector do not produce goods. (tertiary / agricultural) (iii) Most of the workers in the
_________ sector enjoy job security. (organised / unorganised) (iv) A _________ proportion of
labourers in India are working in the unorganised sector. (large / small) (v) Cotton is a _________
product and cloth is a _________ product. [natural /manufactured] (vi) The activities in primary,
secondary and tertiary sectors are_________ [independent / interdependent] 2.

Choose the most appropriate answer. (a) The sectors are classified into public and private sector on
the basis of: (i) employment conditions (ii) (iii) ownership of enterprises (iv) number of workers
employed in the enterprise (b) Production of a commodity, mostly through the natural process, is an
(i) primary (ii) secondary (iii) tertiary (iv) information technology (c) GDP is the total value of
_________ produced during a particular year. (i) all goods and services (ii) all final goods and
services (iii) all intermediate goods and services (iv) all intermediate and final goods and
services (d) In terms of GVA the share of tertiary sector in 2017–18 is between _________ per cent.
(i) 20 to 30 (ii) 30 to 40 (iii) 50 to 60 (iv) 60 to 70 ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN
E E ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL 3.

Match the following: Problems faced by farming sector Some possible measures 1. Unirrigated land (a)
Setting up agro-based mills 2. Low prices for crops (b) Cooperative marketing societies 3. Debt
burden (c) Procurement of food grains by government 4. No job in the off season (d) Construction of
canals by the government 5. Compelled to sell their grains to (e) Banks to provide credit with low
interest the local traders soon after harvest 4.

Find the odd one out and say why. (i) Tourist guide, dhobi, tailor, potter (ii) Teacher, doctor,
vegetable vendor, lawyer (iii) Postman, cobbler, soldier, police constable (iv) MTNL, Indian
Railways, Air India, Jet Airways, All India Radio 5.

A research scholar looked at the working people in the city of Surat and found the following.

Percentage of working people Nature of employment Organised Place of work In offices and factories
registered with the government Own shops, office, clinics in marketplaces with formal license People
working on the street, construction workers, domestic workers Working in small workshops usually not
registered with the government Complete the table. What is the percentage of workers in the
unorganised sector in this city? 6.

Do you think the classification of economic activities into primary, secondary and tertiary is
useful? Explain how. 7.

For each of the sectors that we came across in this chapter why should one focus on employment and
GVA? Could there be other issues which should be examined? Discuss. 8.

Make a long list of all kinds of work that you find adults around you doing for a living. In what
way can you classify them? Explain your choice. 9.

How is the tertiary sector different from other sectors? Illustrate with a few examples. 10.

What do you understand by disguised unemployment? Explain with an example each from the urban and
rural areas. 11.

Distinguish between open unemployment and disguised unemployment. 12. “Tertiary sector is not
playing any significant role in the development of Indian economy.” Do you agree? Give reasons in
support of your answer.

ANDING E E CONOMIC D D EVEL ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E ECTORS OF OF OF THE THE
THE I I INDIAN NDIAN E E 13.

Service sector in India employs two different kinds of people. Who are these? 14.

Workers are exploited in the unorganised sector. Do you agree with this view? Give reasons in
support of your answer. 15.

How are the activities in the economy classified on the basis of employment conditions? 16.

Compare the employment conditions prevailing in the organised and unorganised sectors. 17.

Explain the objective of implementing the MG NREGA 2005. 18.

Using examples from your area compare and contrast that activities and functions of private and
public sectors. 19.

Discuss and fill the following table giving one example each from your area.

Well managed organisation Badly managed organisation Public sector Private Sector 20.

Give a few examples of public sector activities and explain why the government has taken them up.
21.

Explain how public sector contributes to the economic development of a nation. 22.

The workers in the unorganised sector need protection on the following issues : wages, safety and
health. Explain with examples. 23.

A study in Ahmedabad found that out of 15,00,000 workers in the city, 11,00,000 worked in the
unorganised sector. The total income of the city in this year (1997-1998) was Rs 60,000 million. Out
of this Rs 32,000 million was generated in the organised sector. Present this data as a table. What
kind of ways should be thought of for generating more employment in the city? 24.

The following table gives the GVA in Rupees (Crores) by the three sectors: Year Primary Secondary
Tertiary 12,56,000 10,12,000 18,17,000 17,87,000 24,59,000 46,30,000 (i) Calculate the share of the
three sectors in GDP for 2000 and 2013. (ii) Show the data as a bar diagram similar to Graph 2 in
the chapter. (iii) What conclusions can we draw from the bar graph?