Challenges to political parties



We have seen how crucial political parties are for the working of democracy. Since parties are the
most visible face of democracy, it is natural that people blame parties for whatever is wrong with
the working of democracy. All over the world, people express strong dissatisfaction with the failure
of political parties to perform their functions well.

This is the case in our country too.

Popular dissatisfaction and criticism has focussed on four problem areas in the working of political
parties.

Political parties need to face and overcome these challenges in order to remain effective
instruments of democracy.

The first challenge is lack of internal democracy within parties.

All over the world there is a tendency in political parties towards the concentration of power in
one or few leaders at the top. Parties do not keep membership registers, do not hold organisational
meetings, and do not conduct internal elections regularly. Ordinary members of the party do not get
sufficient information on what happens inside the party. They do not have the means or the
connections needed to influence the decisions. As a result, the leaders assume greater power to make
decisions in the name of the party.

Since one or few leaders exercise paramount power in the party, those who disagree with the
leadership find Why don’t parties give enough tickets to women? Is that also due to lack of internal
democracy? Berlusconi was the Prime Minister of Italy. He is also one of the top businessmen in
Italy. He is the leader of the Forza Italia founded in 1993. His company owns TV channels, the most
important publishing company, a foot ball club (AC Milan) and a bank. This cartoon was made during
the last elections. © Riber Hansson - Svenska Dagbladet, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Berlusconi Puppet Theatre De moc ra tic Polit ics it difficult to continue in the party.

More than loyalty to party principles and policies, personal loyalty to the leader becomes more
important.

The second challenge of dynastic succession is related to the first one. Since most political
parties do not practice open and transparent procedures for their functioning, there are very few
ways for an ordinary worker to rise to the top in a party. Those who happen to be the leaders are in
a position of unfair advantage to favour people close to them or even their family members.

In many parties, the top positions are always controlled by members of one family. This is unfair to
other members of that party. This is also bad for democracy, since people who do not have adequate
experience or popular support come to occupy positions of power. This tendency is present in some
measure all over the world, including in some of the older democracies.

The third challenge is about the growing role of money and muscle power in parties, especially
during elections. Since parties are focussed only on winning elections, they tend to use short-cuts
to win elections. They tend to nominate those candidates who have or can raise lots of money. Rich
people and companies who give funds to the parties tend to have influence on the policies and
decisions of the party. In some cases, parties support criminals who can win elections. Democrats
all over the world are worried about the increasing role of rich people and big companies in
democratic politics.

The fourth challenge is that very often parties do not seem to offer a meaningful choice to the
voters. In order to offer meaningful choice, parties must be significantly different. In recent
years, there has been a decline in the ideological differences among parties in most parts of the
world. For example, the difference between the Labour Party and the Conservative Party in Britain is
very little. They agree on more fundamental aspects but differ only in details on how policies are
to be framed and implemented.

In our country too, the differences among all the major parties on the economic policies have
reduced.

Those who want really different policies have no option available to them. Sometimes people cannot
even elect very different leaders either, because the same set of leaders keep shifting from one
party to another. © Huffaker - Cagle Cartoons Inc., 16 June 2004 This cartoon was drawn during the
Presidency of George Bush of the Republican Party in the USA. The party’s symbol is elephant. The
cartoon seems to suggest that the Corporate America controls all major institutions of the country.

Po lit ica l Pa r tie s