PUBLIC FACILITIES



What does this table show? The first column of the table shows that in Kerala, out of 1000 children
born, 6 died before completing one year of age but in Haryana the proportion of children dying
within one year of birth was 28, which is nearly three times more than that of Kerala. On the other
hand, the per capita income of Haryana is more than that of Kerala as shown in Table 1.3. Just think
of how dear you are to your parents, think of how every one is so happy when a child is born. Now,
try to think of parents whose children die before they even celebrate their first birthday.

How painful it must be to these parents? Next, note the year to which this data pertains. This was
during 2018. So we are not talking of old times; it is 70 years after independence when our metro
cities are full of high rise buildings and shopping malls! How is it that the average person in
Haryana has more income than the average person in Kerala but lags behind in these crucial areas?
The reason is — money in your pocket cannot buy all the goods and services that you may need to live
well. So, income by itself is not a completely adequate indicator of material goods and services
that citizens are able to use.

For example, normally, your money cannot buy you a pollution-free environment or ensure that you get
unadulterated medicines, unless you can afford to shift to a community that already has all these
things. Money may also not be able to protect you from infectious diseases, unless the whole of your
community takes preventive steps.

The problem does not end with Infant Mortality Rate. The last column of table 1.4 shows that about
one-third of the children aged 15–17 years in Bihar are not attending school in secondary classes.
This means that if you went to school in Bihar nearly one-third of your class friends would be
missing. Those who could have been in school are not there! If this had happened to you, you would
not be able to read what you are reading now.

Actually for many of the important things in life the best way, also the cheapest way, is to provide
these goods and services collectively. Just think – will it be cheaper to have collective security
for the whole locality or for each house to have its own security staff? What if no one, other than
you, in your village or locality is interested in studying? Would you be able to study? Not unless
your parents could afford to send you to some private school elsewhere. So you are actually able to
study because many other children also want to study and because many people believe that the
government should open schools and provide other facilities so that all children have a chance to
study. Even now, in many areas, children, particularly girls, are not able to go to high school
because the government/society has not provided adequate facilities.

Most babies require basic healthcare UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC
CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT (a) The literacy rate for all age groups, including
young and old, is _____ for rural males and _____ for rural females. However, it is not just that
these many adults could not attend school but that there are _____ who are currently not in school.
(b) It is clear from the table that _____ % of rural girls and _____% of rural boys are not
attending school. Therefore, illiteracy among children in the age group 10- 14 is as high as _____%
for rural females and _____% for rural males. (c) This high level of illiteracy among __________ age
group, even after more than 75 years of our independence, is most disturbing. In many other states
also we are nowhere near realisation of the constitutional goal of free and compulsory education for
all children up to the age of 14, which was expected to be achieved by 1960.

Study Table 1.5 carefully and fill in the blanks in the following paragraphs. For this, you may need
to make calculations based on the table. 1. Look at data in Tables 1.3 and 1.4. Is Haryana ahead of
Kerala in literacy rate etc., as it is in terms of per capita income? 2. Think of other examples
where collective provision of goods and services is cheaper than individual provision. 3. Does
availability of good health and educational facilities depend only on amount of money spent by the
government on these facilities? What other factors could be relevant? 4. In a study, it was found
that in Tamil Nadu, 90 per cent of the people living in rural areas used a ration shop, whereas in
West Bengal only 35 per cent of rural people did so. Where would people did better off and why?
TABLE 1.5 EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT OF RURAL Kerala has a low Infant Mortality Rate because it has
adequate provision of basic health and educational facilities. Similarly, in some states, the Public
Distribution System (PDS) functions well. Health and nutritional status of people of such states is
certainly likely to be better.

Category Male Female Literacy rate for rural population 76% 54% Literacy rate for rural children in
age group 10-14 years 90% 87% Percentage of rural children aged 10-14 attending school 85% 82%
EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT HUMAN HUMAN HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPOR REPOR Once it is realised that even though
the level of income is important, yet it is an inadequate measure of the level of development, we
begin to think of other criterion. There could be a long list of such criterion but then it would
not be so useful. What we need is a small number of the most important things. Health and education
indicators, such as the ones we used in comparison of Kerala and Haryana, are among them. Over the
past decade or so, health and education indicators have come to be widely used along with income as
a measure of development. For instance, Human Development Report published by UNDP compares
countries based on the educational levels of the people, their health status and per capita income.
It would be interesting to look at certain relevant data regarding India and its neighbours from
Human Development Report 2023-24.

TABLE 1.6 SOME DATA REGARDING INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS Country Gross National Life Mean Years of HDI
Rank in Income (GNI) Expectancy Schooling of the world per capita at birth People aged 25 (2021-22)
(2017 PPP $) and above Sri Lanka 11,899 76.6 11.2 India 6,951 67.7 6.5 Myanmar 4,038 67.3 6.5
Pakistan 5,374 66.4 4.4 Nepal 4,026 70.5 4.5 Bangladesh 6,511 73.7 7.4 Source : Human Development
Report, 2023–24, United Nations Development Programme, New York.

NOTES 1. HDI stands for Human Development Index. HDI ranks in above table are out of 193 countries
in all. 2. Life Expectancy at birth denotes, as the name suggests, average expected length of life
of a person at the time of birth. 3. Per Capita Income is calculated in dollars for all countries so
that it can be compared. It is also done in a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of
goods and services in any country.

One way to find out if we are properly nourished is to calculate what nutrition scientists call Body
Mass Index (BMI). This is easy to calculate. Let each student in the class find out his or her
weight and height. Take the weight of each student in kilograms (kg). Then, take the height by
drawing up a scale on the wall and measuring accurately with the head straight. Convert the height
recorded in centimeters into meters. Divide the weight in kg by the square of the height. The number
you get is called BMI. Then, look at the BMI-for-Age tables given on pages 90–91. A student’s BMI
could be within the normal range or less than that (underweight) or more (obesity). For example, if
a girl student is 14 years and 8 month old and the BMI is 15.2, then she is undernourished.
Similarly, if the BMI of a boy aged 15 years and 6 months is 28, then he is overweight.

Discuss the life situation, of students, in general, without body shaming anyone.

UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT
OPMENT OPMENT Isn’t it surprising that a small country in our neighbourhood, Sri Lanka, is much
ahead of India in every respect and a big country like ours has such a low rank in the world? Table
1.6 also shows that though Nepal and Bangladesh have low per capita income than that of India, yet
they are better than India in life expectancy.

Many improvements have been suggested in calculating HDI and Suppose for the present that a
particular country is quite developed.

We would certainly like this level of development to go up further or at least be maintained for
future generations. This is obviously desirable. However, since the second half of the twentieth
century, a number of scientists have been warning that the present type, and levels, of development
are not sustainable.

Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India
Example 1: Groundwater in India Example 1: Groundwater in India “Recent evidence suggests that the
groundwater is under serious threat of overuse in many parts of the country. About 300 districts
have reported a water level decline of over 4 metres during the past 20 years. Nearly one-third of
the country is overusing their groundwater reserves.

In another years, 60 per cent of the country would be doing the same if the present way of using
this resource continues. Groundwater overuse is particularly found in the agriculturally prosperous
regions of Punjab and Western U.P., hard rock plateau areas of central and south India, some coastal
areas and the rapidly growing urban settlements.” (a) Why groundwater is overused? (b) Can there be
development without overuse?