3.3 Manchester Comes to India



In 1772, Henry Patullo, a Company official, had ventured to say that the demand for Indian textiles
could never reduce, since no other nation produced goods of the same quality. Yet by the beginning
of the nineteenth century we see the beginning of a long decline of textile exports from India. In
1811-12 piece-goods accounted for 33 per cent of India’s exports; by 1850-51 it was no more than 3
per cent.

Why did this happen? What were its implications? As cotton industries developed in England,
industrial groups began worrying about imports from other countries. They pressurised the government
to impose import duties on cotton textiles so that Manchester goods could sell in Britain without
facing any competition from outside. At the same time industrialists persuaded the East India
Company to sell British manufactures in Indian markets as well. Exports of British cotton goods
increased dramatically in the early nineteenth century. At the end of the eighteenth century there
had been virtually no import of cotton piece-goods into India. But by 1850 cotton piece-goods
constituted over 31 per cent of the value of Indian imports; and by the 1870s this figure was over
50 per cent.

Cotton weavers in India thus faced two problems at the same time: their export market collapsed, and
the local market shrank, being glutted with Manchester imports. Produced by machines at lower costs,
the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could not easily compete with them. By the
1850s, reports from most weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation.

By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get sufficient supply of raw cotton of
good quality. When the American The Commissioner of Patna wrote: ‘It appears that twenty yeas ago, a
brisk trade was carried on in the manufacture of cloth at Jahanabad, and Behar, which has in the
former place entirely ceased, while in the latter the amount of manufacture is very limited, in
consequence of the cheap and durable goods from Manchester with which the Native manufactures are
unable to compete.’ Quoted in J. Krishnamurty, ‘Deindustrialisation in Gangetic Bihar during the
nineteenth century’, The Indian Economic and Social History Review, 1985. weavers, the Census Report
of Central Provinces stated: ‘The Koshtis, like the weavers of the finer kinds of cloth in other
parts of India, have fallen upon evil times. They are unable to compete with the showy goods which
Manchester sends in such profusion, and they have of late years emigrated in great numbers, chiefly
to Berar, where as day labourers they are able to obtain wages …’ Census Report of Central
Provinces, 1872, quoted in Sumit Guha, ‘The handloom industry in Central India, 1825-1950’, The
Indian Economic and Social History Review.

Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut off, Britain turned to India. As raw
cotton exports from India increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India were starved
of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not
pay.

Then, by the end of the nineteenth century, weavers and other craftspeople faced yet another
problem. Factories in India began production, flooding the market with machine-goods. How could
weaving industries possibly survive? and the growth of the colonial economy.