9 Print and Censorship



Before 1798, the colonial state under the East India Company was not too concerned with censorship.
Strangely, its early measures to control printed matter were directed against Englishmen in India
who were critical of Company misrule and hated the actions of particular Company officers. The
Company was worried that such criticisms might be used by its critics in England to attack its trade
monopoly in India.

By the 1820s, the Calcutta Supreme Court passed certain regulations to control press freedom and the
Company began encouraging publication of newspapers that would celebrate Britsh rule. In 1835, faced
with urgent petitions by editors of English and vernacular newspapers, Governor-General Bentinck
agreed to revise press laws.

Thomas Macaulay, a liberal colonial official, formulated new rules that restored the earlier
freedoms.

After the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press changed. Enraged Englishmen demanded
a clamp down on the ‘native’ press. As vernacular newspapers became assertively nationalist, the
colonial government began debating measures of stringent control. In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act
was passed, modelled on the Irish Press Laws. It provided the government with extensive rights to
censor reports and editorials in the vernacular press. From now on the government kept regular track
of the vernacular newspapers published in different provinces. When a report was judged as
seditious, the newspaper was warned, and if the warning was ignored, the press was liable to be
seized and the printing machinery confiscated.

Despite repressive measures, nationalist newspapers grew in numbers in all parts of India. They
reported on colonial misrule and encouraged nationalist activities. Attempts to throttle nationalist
criticism provoked militant protest. This in turn led to a renewed cycle of persecution and
protests. When Punjab revolutionaries were deported in 1907, Balgangadhar Tilak wrote with great
sympathy about them in his Kesari. This led to his imprisonment in 1908, provoking in turn
widespread protests all over India. find candidates for editorship of loyalist papers.

When Sanders, editor of the Statesman that had been founded in 1877, was approached, he asked rudely
how much he would be paid for suffering the loss of freedom. The Friend of India refused a
government subsidy, fearing that this would force it to be obedient to government commands. seen in
the way governments seek to regulate and suppress print. The colonial government kept continuous
track of all books and newspapers published in India and passed numerous laws to control the press.

During the First World War, under the Defence of India Rules, 22 newspapers had to furnish
securities. Of these, 18 shut down rather than comply with government orders. The Sedition Committee
Report under Rowlatt in 1919 further strengthened controls that led to imposition of penalties on
various newspapers. At the outbreak of the Second World War, the Defence of India Act was passed,
allowing censoring of reports of war-related topics. All reports about the Quit India movement came
under its purview. In August 1942, about 90 newspapers were suppressed. ‘Liberty of speech ...
liberty of the press ... freedom of association. The Government of India is now seeking to crush the
three powerful vehicles of expressing and cultivating public opinion. The fight for Swaraj, for
Khilafat ... means a fight for this threatened freedom before all else ...’ Why did some people in
eighteenth century Europe think that print culture would bring enlightenment and end despotism? 2.

Why did some people fear the effect of easily available printed books? Choose one example from
Europe and one from India. 3.

What were the effects of the spread of print culture for poor people in nineteenth century India? 4.

Give reasons for the following: a) Woodblock print only came to Europe after 1295. b) Martin Luther
was in favour of print and spoke out in praise of it. c) The Roman Catholic Church began keeping an
Index of Prohibited books from the mid-sixteenth century. d) Gandhi said the fight for Swaraj is a
fight for liberty of speech, liberty of the press, and freedom of association. 2.

Write short notes to show what you know about: a) The Gutenberg Press b) Erasmus’s idea of the
printed book c) The Vernacular Press Act 3.

What did the spread of print culture in nineteenth century India mean to: a) Women b) The poor c)
Reformers