4 The Reading Mania



Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries literacy rates went up in most parts of Europe.
Churches of different denominations set up schools in villages, carrying literacy to peasants and
artisans.

By the end of the eighteenth century, in some parts of Europe literacy rates were as high as 60 to
80 per cent. As literacy and schools spread in European countries, there was a virtual reading
mania.

People wanted books to read and printers produced books in ever- increasing numbers.

New forms of popular literature appeared in print, targeting new audiences. Booksellers employed
pedlars who roamed around villages, carrying little books for sale. There were almanacs or ritual
calendars, along with ballads and folktales. But other forms of reading matter, largely for
entertainment, began to reach ordinary readers as well. In England, penny chapbooks were carried by
petty pedlars known as chapmen, and sold for a penny, so that even the poor could buy them. In
France, were the “Biliotheque Bleue”, which were low-priced small books printed on poor quality
paper, and bound in cheap blue covers. Then there were the romances, printed on four to six pages,
and the more substantial ‘histories’ which were stories about the past. Books were of various sizes,
serving many different purposes and interests.

The periodical press developed from the early eighteenth century, combining information about
current affairs with entertainment.

Newspapers and journals carried information about wars and trade, as well as news of developments in
other places.

Similarly, the ideas of scientists and philosophers now became more accessible to the common people.
Ancient and medieval scientific texts were compiled and published, and maps and scientific diagrams
were widely printed. When scientists like Isaac Newton began to publish their discoveries, they
could influence a much wider circle of scientifically minded readers. The writings of thinkers such
as Thomas Paine, Voltaire and Jean Jacques Rousseau were also widely printed and read. Thus their
ideas about science, reason and rationality found their way into popular literature.

Almanac – An annual publication giving astronomical data, information about the movements of the sun
and moon, timing of full tides and eclipses, and much else that was of importance in the everyday
life of people Chapbook – A term used to describe pocket- size books that are sold by travelling
pedlars called chapmen. These became popular from the time of the sixteenth-century print revolution
wrote in his diary: ‘The sale of books in general has increased prodigiously within the last twenty
years. The poorer sort of farmers and even the poor country people in general who before that period
spent their winter evenings in relating stories of witches, ghosts, hobgoblins … now shorten the
winter night by hearing their sons and daughters read them tales, romances, etc. If John goes to
town with a load of hay, he is charged to be sure not to forget to bring home Peregrine Pickle’s
Adventure … and when Dolly is sent to sell her eggs, she is commissioned to purchase The History of
Joseph Andrews.’ Print Culture 4.1 ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world!’ By the mid-eighteenth
century, there was a common conviction that books were a means of spreading progress and
enlightenment. Many believed that books could change the world, liberate society from despotism and
tyranny, and herald a time when reason and intellect would rule. Louise-Sebastien Mercier, a
novelist in eighteenth-century France, declared: ‘The printing press is the most powerful engine of
progress and public opinion is the force that will sweep despotism away.’ In many of Mercier’s
novels, the heroes are transformed by acts of reading. They devour books, are lost in the world
books of despotism, Mercier proclaimed: ‘Tremble, therefore, tyrants of the world! Tremble before
the virtual writer!’