3.1 The Age of Indian Textiles



Before the age of machine industries, silk and cotton goods from India dominated the international
market in textiles. Coarser cottons were produced in many countries, but the finer varieties often
came from India. Armenian and Persian merchants took the goods from Punjab to Afghanistan, eastern
Persia and Central Asia. Bales of fine textiles were carried on camel back via the north-west
frontier, through mountain passes and across deserts. A vibrant sea trade operated through the main
pre-colonial ports. Surat on the Gujarat coast connected India to the Gulf and Red Sea Ports;
Masulipatam on the Coromandel coast and Hoogly in Bengal had trade links with Southeast Asian ports.

A variety of Indian merchants and bankers were involved in this network of export trade – financing
production, carrying goods and supplying exporters. Supply merchants linked the port towns to the
inland regions. They gave advances to weavers, procured the woven cloth from weaving villages, and
carried the supply to the ports. At the port, the big shippers and export merchants had brokers who
negotiated the price and bought goods from the supply merchants operating inland.

By the 1750s this network, controlled by Indian merchants, was breaking down.

The European companies gradually gained power – first securing a variety of concessions from local
courts, then the monopoly rights to trade. This resulted in a decline of the old ports of Surat and
Hoogly through which local merchants had operated. Exports from these ports fell dramatically, the
credit that had financed the earlier trade began drying up, and the local bankers slowly went
bankrupt.

In the last years of the seventeenth century, the gross value of trade that passed through Surat had
been Rs 16 million. By the 1740s it had slumped to Rs 3 million.

On a map of Asia, find and draw the sea and land links of the textile trade from India to Central
Asia, West Asia and Southeast Asia. shift from the old ports to the new ones was an indicator of the
growth of colonial power. Trade through the new ports came to be controlled by European companies,
and was carried in European ships. While many of the old trading houses collapsed, those that wanted
to survive had to now operate within a network shaped by European trading companies.

How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans?