2.1 Life of the Workers



The abundance of labour in the market affected the lives of workers.

As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds tramped to the cities. The actual
possibility of getting a job depended on existing networks of friendship and kin relations. If you
had a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a job quickly. But not everyone
had social connections. Many job- seekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in
night Many artists from the late nineteenth century began idealising workers: they were shown
suffering hardship and pain for the cause of the nation. were maintained under the supervision of
the Poor Law Commissioners for the ‘destitute, wayfarers, wanderers and foundling’. Staying in these
workhouses was a humiliating experience: everyone was subjected to a medical examination to see
whether they were carrying disease, their bodies were cleansed, and their clothes purified. They had
to also do hard labour.

The Age of Industrialisation shelters. Some stayed in Night Refuges that were set up by private
individuals; others went to the Casual Wards maintained by the Poor Law authorities.

Seasonality of work in many industries meant prolonged periods without work. After the busy season
was over, the poor were on the streets again. Some returned to the countryside after the winter,
when the demand for labour in the rural areas opened up in places.

But most looked for odd jobs, which till the mid-nineteenth century were difficult to find.

Wages increased somewhat in the early nineteenth century. But they tell us little about the welfare
of the workers. The average figures hide the variations between trades and the fluctuations from
year to year. For instance, when prices rose sharply during the prolonged Napoleonic War, the real
value of what the workers earned fell significantly, since the same wages could now buy fewer
things.

Moreover, the income of workers depended not on the wage rate alone. What was also critical was the
period of employment: the number of days of work determined the average daily income of the workers.
At the best of times till the mid-nineteenth century, about 10 per cent of the urban population were
extremely poor. In periods of economic slump, like the 1830s, the proportion of unemployed went up
to anything between 35 and 75 per cent in different regions.

The fear of unemployment made workers hostile to the introduction of new technology. When the
Spinning Jenny was introduced in A magistrate reported in 1790 about an incident when he was called
in to protect a manufacturer’s property from being attacked by workers: ‘From the depredations of a
lawless Banditti of colliers and their wives, for the wives had lost their work to spinning engines
… they advanced at first with much insolence, avowing their intention of cutting to pieces the
machine lately introduced in the woollen manufacture; which they suppose, if generally adopted, will
lessen the demand for manual labour. The women became clamorous.

The men were more open to conviction and after some expostulation were induced to desist from their
purpose and return peaceably home.’ J.L. Hammond and B. Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832,
quoted in Maxine Berg, The Age of Manufactures. in 1764, this machine speeded up the spinning
process and reduced labour demand. By turning one single wheel a worker could set in motion a number
of spindles and spin several threads at the same time.

Notice the number of spindles that could be operated with one wheel. spindles spindles workers to
dig tunnels, erect timber scaffolding, do the brick and iron works. Job-seekers moved from one
construction site to another. the woollen industry, women who survived on hand spinning began
attacking the new machines. This conflict over the introduction of the jenny continued for a long
time.

After the 1840s, building activity intensified in the cities, opening up greater opportunities of
employment. Roads were widened, new railway stations came up, railway lines were extended, tunnels
dug, drainage and sewers laid, rivers embanked. The number of workers employed in the transport
industry doubled in the 1840s, and doubled again in the subsequent 30 years.

The Age of Industrialisation