2.2 What did Liberal Nationalism Stand for?



Ideas of national unity in early-nineteenth-century Europe were closely allied to the ideology of
liberalism. The term ‘liberalism’ derives from the Latin root liber, meaning free. For the new
middle classes liberalism stood for freedom for the individual and equality of all before the law.
Politically, it emphasised the concept of government by consent. Since the French Revolution,
liberalism had stood for the end of autocracy and clerical privileges, a constitution and
representative government through parliament. Nineteenth-century liberals also stressed the
inviolability of private property.

Yet, equality before the law did not necessarily stand for universal suffrage. You will recall that
in revolutionary France, which marked the first political experiment in liberal democracy, the right
to vote and to get elected was granted exclusively to property-owning men.

Men without property and all women were excluded from political rights. Only for a brief period
under the Jacobins did all adult males enjoy suffrage. However, the Napoleonic Code went back to
limited suffrage and reduced women to the status of a minor, subject to the authority of fathers and
husbands. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries women and non-propertied men
organised opposition movements demanding equal political rights.

In the economic sphere, liberalism stood for the freedom of markets and the abolition of state-
imposed restrictions on the movement of goods and capital. During the nineteenth century this was a
strong demand of the emerging middle classes. Let us take the example of the German-speaking regions
in the first half of the nineteenth century. Napoleon’s administrative measures had created out of
countless small principalities a confederation of 39 states. Each of these possessed its own
currency, and weights and measures. A merchant travelling in 1833 from Hamburg to Nuremberg to sell
his goods would have had to pass through 11 customs barriers and pay a customs duty of about 5 per
cent at each one of them. Duties were often levied according to the weight or measurement of the
goods. As each region had its own system of weights and measures, this involved time-consuming
calculation. The measure of cloth, for example, was the elle which in each region stood for a
different length. An elle of textile material bought in Frankfurt would get you 54.7 cm of cloth, in
Mainz 55.1 cm, in Nuremberg 65.6 cm, in Freiburg 53.5 cm.

Such conditions were viewed as obstacles to economic exchange and growth by the new commercial
classes, who argued for the creation of a unified economic territory allowing the unhindered
movement of goods, people and capital. In 1834, a customs union or zollverein was formed at the
initiative of Prussia and joined by most of the German states. The union abolished tariff barriers
and reduced the number of currencies from over thirty to two. The creation of a network of railways
further stimulated mobility, harnessing economic interests to national unification. A wave of
economic nationalism strengthened the wider nationalist sentiments growing at the time.