1.1 The Coming Up of the Factory



The earliest factories in England came up by the 1730s. But it was only in the late eighteenth
century that the number of factories multiplied.

The first symbol of the new era was cotton. Its production boomed in the late nineteenth century. In
1760 Britain was importing 2.5 million pounds of raw cotton to feed its cotton industry. By 1787
this import soared to 22 million pounds. This increase was linked to a number of changes within the
process of production. Let us look briefly at some of these.

A series of inventions in the eighteenth century increased the efficacy of each step of the
production process (carding, twisting and spinning, and rolling). They enhanced the output per
worker, enabling each worker to produce more, and they made possible the production of stronger
threads and yarn. Then Richard Arkwright village households. But now, the costly new machines could
be purchased, set up and maintained in the mill. Within the mill all the according to its fibre
Fuller – A person who ‘fulls’ – that is, gathers – cloth by pleating Carding – The process in which
fibres, such as cotton or wool, are prepared prior to spinning 1925.

The artist said: ‘Seen through the humid atmosphere that makes Lancashire the best cotton-spinning
locality in the world, a huge cotton-mill aglow with electricity in the twilight, is a most
impressive sight.’ The Age of Industrialisation processes were brought together under one roof and
management.

This allowed a more careful supervision over the production process, a watch over quality, and the
regulation of labour, all of which had been difficult to do when production was in the countryside.

In the early nineteenth century, factories increasingly became an intimate part of the English
landscape. So visible were the imposing new mills, so magical seemed to be the power of new
technology, that contemporaries were dazzled. They concentrated their attention on the mills, almost
forgetting the bylanes and the workshops where production still continued.

The way in which historians focus on industrialisation rather than on small workshops is a good
example of how what we believe today about the past is influenced by what historians choose to
notice and what they ignore. Note down one event or aspect of your own life which adults such as
your parents or teachers may think is unimportant, but which you believe to be important.