2.1 Gutenberg and the Printing Press



Gutenberg was the son of a merchant and grew up on a large agricultural estate. From his childhood
he had seen wine and olive presses. Subsequently, he learnt the art of polishing stones, became a
master goldsmith, and also acquired the expertise to create lead moulds used for making trinkets.
Drawing on this knowledge, Gutenberg adapted existing technology to design his innovation.

The olive press provided the model for the printing press, and moulds were used for casting the
metal types for the letters of the alphabet.

By 1448, Gutenberg perfected the system. The first book he printed was the Bible. About 180 copies
were printed and it took three years to produce them. By the standards of the time this was fast
production.

The new technology did not entirely displace the existing art of producing books by hand.

In fact, printed books at first closely resembled the written manuscripts in appearance and layout.
The metal letters imitated the ornamental handwritten styles. Borders were illuminated by hand with
foliage and other patterns, and illustrations were painted. In the books printed for the rich, space
for decoration was kept blank on the printed page. Each purchaser could choose the design and decide
on the painting school that would do the illustrations.

In the hundred years between 1450 and 1550, printing presses were set up in most countries of
Europe. Printers from Germany travelled to other countries, seeking work and helping start new
presses. As the number of printing presses grew, book production boomed.

The second half of the fifteenth century saw 20 million copies of printed books flooding the markets
in Europe. The number went up in the sixteenth century to about 200 million copies.

This shift from hand printing to mechanical printing led to the print revolution.

This handle was used to turn the screw and press down the platen over the printing block that was
placed on top of a sheet of damp paper. Gutenberg developed metal types for each of the 26
characters of the Roman alphabet and devised a way of moving them around so as to compose different
words of the text. This came to be known as the moveable type printing machine, and it remained the
basic print technology over the next 300 years.

Books could now be produced much faster than was possible when each print block was prepared by
carving a piece of wood by hand.

The Gutenberg press could print 250 sheets on one side per hour. 1584.

Printing block placed over paper Frame Screw Handle Platen survived. press with metal type, but the
borders were carefully designed, painted and illuminated by hand by artists. No two copies were the
same. Every page of each copy was different. Even when two copies look similar, a careful comparison
will reveal differences. Elites everywhere preferred this lack of uniformity: what they possessed
then could be claimed as unique, for no one else owned a copy that was exactly the same.

In the text you will notice the use of colour within the letters in various places. This had two
functions: it added colour to the page, and highlighted all the holy words to emphasise their
significance. But the colour on every page of the text was added by hand. Gutenberg printed the text
in black, leaving spaces where the colour could be filled in later. text for printing Galley – Metal
frame in which types are laid and the text composed sixteenth century. All the activities are going
on under one roof.

In the foreground on the right, compositors are at work, while on the left galleys are being
prepared and ink is being applied on the metal types; in the background, the printers are turning
the screws of the press, and near them proofreaders are at work.

Right in front is the final product – the double-page printed sheets, stacked in neat piles, waiting
to be bound.

Print Culture