2.2 Rebellion in the Countryside



From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the countryside. It drew into its fold the
struggles of peasants and tribals by which people block the entrance to a shop, factory or office
The year is 1921. You are a student in a government-controlled school. Design a poster urging school
students to answer Gandhiji’s call to join the Non-Cooperation Movement. which were developing in
different parts of India in the years after the war.

In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra – a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an
indentured labourer. The movement here was against talukdars and landlords who demanded from
peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses. Peasants had to do begar and work at
landlords’ farms without any payment.

As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no
right over the leased land. The peasant movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar,
and social boycott of oppressive landlords. In many places nai – dhobi bandhs were organised by
panchayats to deprive landlords of the services of even barbers and washermen. In June 1920,
Jawaharlal Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to
understand their grievances. By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru,
Baba Ramchandra and a few others. Within a month, over 300 branches had been set up in the villages
around the region. So when the Non- Cooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the
Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider struggle. The peasant movement,
however, developed in forms that the Congress leadership was unhappy with. As the movement spread in
1921, the houses of talukdars and merchants were attacked, bazaars were looted, and grain hoards
were taken over. In many places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that no taxes
were to be paid and land was to be redistributed among the poor. The name of the Mahatma was being
invoked to sanction all action and aspirations. contribute without any payment If you were a peasant
in Uttar Pradesh in 1920, how would you have responded to Gandhiji’s call for Swaraj? Give reasons
for your response. the place of firing, but was stopped by the police. Agitated and angry, Nehru
addressed the peasants who gathered around him. This is how he later described the meeting: ‘They
behaved as brave men, calm and unruffled in the face of danger. I do not know how they felt but I
know what my feelings were. For a moment my blood was up, non-violence was almost forgotten – but
for a moment only. The thought of the great leader, who by God’s goodness has been sent to lead us
to victory, came to me, and I saw the kisans seated and standing near me, less excited, more
peaceful than I was – and the moment of weakness passed, I spoke to them in all humility on non-
violence – I needed the lesson more than they – and they heeded me and peacefully dispersed.’ Quoted
in Sarvapalli Gopal, Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Vol. I. movement in Bardoli, a taluka in
Gujarat, against enhancement of land revenue. Known as the Bardoli Satyagraha, this movement was a
success under the able leadership of Vallabhbhai Patel.

The struggle was widely publicised and generated immense sympathy in many parts of India.

Tribal peasants interpreted the message of Mahatma Gandhi and the idea of swaraj in yet another way.
In the Gudem Hills of Andhra Pradesh, for instance, a militant guerrilla movement spread in the
early 1920s – not a form of struggle that the Congress could approve. Here, as in other forest
regions, the colonial government had closed large forest areas, preventing people from entering the
forests to graze their cattle, or to collect fuelwood and fruits.

This enraged the hill people. Not only were their livelihoods affected but they felt that their
traditional rights were being denied.

When the government began forcing them to contribute begar for road building, the hill people
revolted. The person who came to lead them was an interesting figure. Alluri Sitaram Raju claimed
that he had a variety of special powers: he could make correct astrological predictions and heal
people, and he could survive even bullet shots. Captivated by Raju, the rebels proclaimed that he
was an incarnation of God. Raju talked of the greatness of Mahatma Gandhi, said he was inspired by
the Non-Cooperation Movement, and persuaded people to wear khadi and give up drinking.

But at the same time he asserted that India could be liberated only by the use of force, not non-
violence. The Gudem rebels attacked police stations, attempted to kill British officials and carried
on guerrilla warfare for achieving swaraj. Raju was captured and executed in 1924, and over time
became a folk hero.