Majoritarianism in Sri Lanka



Sri Lanka emerged as an independent country in 1948. The leaders of the Sinhala community sought to
secure dominance over government by virtue of their majority. As a result, the democratically
elected government adopted a series of majoritarian measures to establish Sinhala supremacy.

In 1956, an Act was passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official language, thus disregarding
Tamil. The governments followed preferential policies that favoured Sinhala applicants for
university positions and government jobs. A new constitution stipulated that the state shall protect
and foster Buddhism.

All these government measures, coming one after the other, gradually increased the feeling of
alienation among the Sri Lankan Tamils.

They felt that none of the major political parties led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders was sensitive
to their language and culture. They felt that the constitution and government policies denied them
equal political rights, discriminated against them in getting jobs and other opportunities and
ignored their interests. As a Majoritarianism: A belief that the majority community should be able
to rule a country in whichever way it wants, by disregarding the wishes and needs of the minority.

De moc ra tic Polit ics What kind of a solution is this? I am glad our Constitution does not say
which minister will come from which community.

The Belgian leaders took a different path. They recognised the existence of regional differences and
cultural diversities. Between 1970 and 1993, they amended their constitution four times so as to
work out an arrangement that would enable everyone to live together within the same country.

The arrangement they worked out is different from any other country and is very innovative. Here are
some of the elements of the Belgian model:  Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch and
French-speaking ministers shall be equal in the central government. Some special laws require What’s
wrong if the majority community rules? If Sinhalas don’t rule in Sri Lanka, where else will they
rule? the support of majority of members from each linguistic group. Thus, no single community can
make decisions unilaterally.  Many powers of the Central Government have been given to State
Governments of the two regions of the country. The State Governments are not subordinate to the
Central Government.  Brussels has a separate government in which both the communities have equal
representation. The French- speaking people accepted equal representation in Brussels because the
Dutch-speaking community has accepted equal representation in the