INCOME AND OTHER GOALS



If you go over Table 1.1 again, you will notice one common thing: what people desire are regular
work, better wages, and decent price for their crops or other products that they produce.

In other words, they want more income.

Besides seeking more income, one- way or the other, people also seek things like equal treatment,
freedom, security, and respect of others. They resent discrimination. All these are important goals.
In fact, in some cases, these may be more important than more income or more consumption because
material goods are not all that you need to live.

Money, or material things that one can buy with it, is one factor on which our life depends. But the
quality of our life also depends on non-material things mentioned above. If it is not obvious to
you, then just think of the role of your friends in your life. You may desire their friendship.
Similarly, there are many things that are not easily measured but they mean a lot to our lives.
These are often ignored.

THOSE PEOPLE THOSE PEOPLE THOSE PEOPLE DEVELOP! UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E
ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT 1. Why do different persons have
different notions of development? Which of the following explanations is more important and why? (a)
Because people are different. (b) Because life situations of persons are different. 2. Do the
following two statements mean the same? Justify your answer. (a) People have different developmental
goals. (b) People have conflicting developmental goals. 3. Give some examples where factors other
than income are important aspects of our lives. 4. Explain some of the important ideas of the above
section in your own words.

However, it will be wrong to conclude that what cannot be measured is not important.

Consider another example. If you get a job in a far off place, before accepting it you would try to
consider many factors, apart from income, such as facilities for your family, working atmosphere, or
opportunity to learn. In another case, a job may give you less pay but may offer regular employment
that enhances your sense of security. Another job, however, may offer high pay but no job security
and also leave no time for your family. This will reduce your sense of security and freedom.

Similarly, for development, people look at a mix of goals. It is true that if women are engaged in
paid work, their dignity in the household and society increases. However, it is also the case that
if there is respect for women there would be more sharing of housework and a greater acceptance of
women working outside. A safe and secure environment may allow more women to take up a variety of
jobs or run a business.

Hence, the developmental goals that people have are not only about better income but also about
other important things in life.

If, as we have seen above, individuals seek different goals, then their notion