2.4 Indentured Labour Migration from India



The example of indentured labour migration from India also illustrates the two-sided nature of the
nineteenth-century world.

It was a world of faster economic growth as well as great misery, higher incomes for some and
poverty for others, technological advances in some areas and new forms of coercion in others.

In the nineteenth century, hundreds of thousands of Indian and Chinese labourers went to work on
plantations, in mines, and in road and railway construction projects around the world. In India,
indentured labourers were hired under contracts which promised return travel to India after they had
worked five years on their employer’s plantation.

Most Indian indentured workers came from the present-day regions of eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
central India and the dry districts of Tamil Nadu. In the mid-nineteenth century these regions
experienced many changes – cottage industries declined, land rents rose, lands were cleared for
mines and plantations. All this affected the lives of the poor: they failed to pay their rents,
became deeply indebted and were forced to migrate in search of work. contract to work for an
employer for a specific amount of time, to pay off his passage to a new country or home identity.

The main destinations of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly Trinidad,
Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji.

Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited for
tea plantations in Assam.

Recruitment was done by agents engaged by employers and paid a small commission. Many migrants
agreed to take up work hoping to escape poverty or oppression in their home villages.

Agents also tempted the prospective migrants by providing false information about final
destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the work, and living and working conditions. Often
migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long sea voyage. Sometimes agents even
forcibly abducted less willing migrants.

Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a ‘new system of slavery’. On arrival at the
plantations, labourers found conditions to be different from what they had imagined. Living and
working conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights.

But workers discovered their own ways of surviving. Many of them escaped into the wilds, though if
caught they faced severe punishment.

Others developed new forms of individual and collective self- expression, blending different
cultural forms, old and new. In Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a
riotous carnival called ‘Hosay’ (for Imam Hussain) in which workers of all races and religions
joined. Similarly, the protest religion of Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star
Bob Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian migrants to the Caribbean.
‘Chutney music’, popular in Trinidad and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the
post-indenture experience. These forms of cultural fusion are part of the making of the global
world, where things from different places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become
something entirely new.

Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, or returned to their new homes after
a short spell in India. Consequently, there are large communities of people of Indian descent in
these countries. Have you heard of the Nobel Prize-winning writer For the employers, the numbers and
not the names mattered.

The Making of a Global World V.S. Naipaul? Some of you may have followed the exploits of West Indies
cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh Sarwan. If you have wondered why their names sound
vaguely Indian, the answer is that they are descended from indentured labour migrants from India.

From the 1900s India’s nationalist leaders began opposing the system of indentured labour migration
as abusive and cruel. It was abolished in 1921. Yet for a number of decades afterwards, descendants
of Indian indentured workers, often thought of as ‘coolies’, remained an uneasy minority in the
Caribbean islands. Some of Naipaul’s early novels capture their sense of loss and alienation.