3.2 Hunger, Hardship and Popular Revolt



The 1830s were years of great economic hardship in Europe. The first half of the nineteenth century
saw an enormous increase in population all over Europe. In most countries there were more seekers of
jobs than employment. Population from rural areas migrated to the cities to live in overcrowded
slums. Small producers in towns were often faced with stiff competition from imports of cheap
machine-made goods from England, where industrialisation was more advanced than on the continent.
This was especially so in textile production, which was carried out mainly in homes or small
workshops and was only partly mechanised. In those regions of Europe where the aristocracy still
enjoyed power, peasants struggled under the burden of feudal dues and obligations. The rise of food
prices or a year of bad harvest led to widespread pauperism in town and country.

The year 1848 was one such year. Food shortages and widespread unemployment brought the population
of Paris out on the roads.

Barricades were erected and Louis Philippe was forced to flee. A identity. adult males above 21, and
guaranteed the right to work. National workshops to provide employment were set up.

Earlier, in 1845, weavers in Silesia had led a revolt against contractors who supplied them raw
material and gave them orders for finished textiles but drastically reduced their payments. The
journalist Wilhelm Wolff described the events in a Silesian village as follows: In these villages
(with 18,000 inhabitants) cotton weaving is the most widespread occupation … The misery of the
workers is extreme. The desperate need for jobs has been taken advantage of by the contractors to
reduce the prices of the goods they order … On 4 June at 2 p.m. a large crowd of weavers emerged
from their homes and marched in pairs up to the mansion of their contractor demanding higher wages.
They were treated with scorn and threats alternately. Following this, a group of them forced their
way into the house, smashed its elegant window- panes, furniture, porcelain … another group broke
into the storehouse and plundered it of supplies of cloth which they tore to shreds … The contractor
fled with his family to a neighbouring village which, however, refused to shelter such a person. He
returned 24 hours later having requisitioned the army.

In the exchange that followed, eleven weavers were shot. journalist. 3.3 1848: The Revolution of the
Liberals Parallel to the revolts of the poor, unemployed and starving peasants and workers in many
European countries in the year 1848, a revolution led by the educated middle classes was under way.
Events of February 1848 in France had brought about the abdication of the monarch and a republic
based on universal male suffrage had been proclaimed.

In other parts of Europe where independent nation-states did not yet exist – such as Germany, Italy,
Poland, the Austro-Hungarian Empire – men and women of the liberal middle classes combined their
demands for constitutionalism with national unification. They took advantage of the growing popular
unrest to push their demands for the creation of a nation-state on parliamentary principles – a
constitution, freedom of the press and freedom of association.

In the German regions a large number of political associations whose members were middle-class
professionals, businessmen and prosperous artisans came together in the city of Frankfurt and
decided to vote for an all-German National Assembly. On 18 May 1848, 831 elected representatives
marched in a festive procession to take their places in the Frankfurt parliament convened in the
Church of St Paul. They drafted a constitution for a German nation to be headed by a monarchy
subject to a parliament. When the deputies offered the crown on these terms to Friedrich Wilhelm IV,
King of Prussia, he rejected it and joined other monarchs to oppose the elected assembly. While the
opposition of the aristocracy and military became stronger, the social basis of parliament eroded.
The parliament was dominated by the middle classes who resisted the demands of workers and artisans
and consequently lost their support.

In the end troops were called in and the assembly was forced to disband.

The issue of extending political rights to women was a controversial one within the liberal
movement, in which large numbers of women had participated actively over the years. Women had formed
their own political associations, founded newspapers and taken part in political meetings and
demonstrations. Despite this they were denied How were liberty and equality for women to be defined?
The liberal politician Carl Welcker, an elected member of the Frankfurt Parliament, expressed the
following views: ‘Nature has created men and women to carry out different functions … Man, the
stronger, the bolder and freer of the two, has been designated as protector of the family, its
provider, meant for public tasks in the domain of law, production, defence. Woman, the weaker,
dependent and timid, requires the protection of man. Her sphere is the home, the care of the
children, the nurturing of the family … Do we require any further proof that given such differences,
equality between the sexes would only endanger harmony and destroy the dignity of the family?’
Louise Otto-Peters (1819-95) was a political activist who founded a women’s journal and subsequently
a feminist political association. The first issue of her newspaper (21 April 1849) carried the
following editorial: ‘Let us ask how many men, possessed by thoughts of living and dying for the
sake of Liberty, would be prepared to fight for the freedom of the entire people, of all human
beings? When asked this question, they would all too easily respond with a “Yes!”, though their
untiring efforts are intended for the benefit of only one half of humanity – men. But Liberty is
indivisible! Free men therefore must not tolerate to be surrounded by the unfree …’ An anonymous
reader of the same newspaper sent the following letter to the editor on 25 June 1850: ‘It is indeed
ridiculous and unreasonable to deny women political rights even though they enjoy the right to
property which they make use of. They perform functions and assume responsibilities without however
getting the benefits that accrue to men for the same … Why this injustice? Is it not a disgrace that
even the stupidest cattle-herder possesses the right to vote, simply because he is a man, whereas
highly talented women owning considerable property are excluded from this right, even though they
contribute so much to the maintenance of the state?’ Source the belief of the social, economic and
political equality of the genders above. What do they reveal about liberal ideology? particular
social and political vision suffrage rights during the election of the Assembly. When the Frankfurt
parliament convened in the Church of St Paul, women were admitted only as observers to stand in the
visitors’ gallery.

Though conservative forces were able to suppress liberal movements in 1848, they could not restore
the old order. Monarchs were beginning to realise that the cycles of revolution and repression could
only be ended by granting concessions to the liberal-nationalist revolutionaries. Hence, in the
years after 1848, the autocratic monarchies of Central and Eastern Europe began to introduce the
changes that had already taken place in Western Europe before 1815.

Thus serfdom and bonded labour were abolished both in the Habsburg dominions and in Russia. The
Habsburg rulers granted more autonomy to the Hungarians in 1867.

Nationalism in Europe