Religion, communalism and politics



Let us now turn to a very different kind of social division, the division based on religious
differences.

This division is not as universal as gender, but religious diversity is fairly widespread in the
world today. Many countries including India have in their population, followers of different
religions. As we noticed in the case of Northern Ireland, even when most of the people belong to the
same religion, there can be serious differences about the way people practice that religion. Unlike
gender differences, the religious differences are often expressed in the field of politics.

Consider the following:  Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be separated from politics.
What he meant by religion was not any particular religion like Hinduism or Islam but moral values
that inform all religions. He believed that politics must be guided by ethics drawn from religion. 
Human rights groups in our country have demanded that the Government should take special steps to
prevent communal riots and protect religious minorities.  Women’s movement has argued that family
laws of all religions discriminate against women.

So they have demanded that government should change these laws to make them more equitable.

All these instances involve a relationship between religion I am not religious.

Why should I bother about communalism and secularism? and politics. But they do not seem very wrong
or dangerous.

Ideas, ideals and values drawn from different religions can and perhaps should play a role in
politics. People should be able to express in politics their needs, interests and demands as a
member of a religious community. Those who hold political power should sometimes be able to regulate
the practice of religion so as to prevent discrimination and oppression.

These political acts are not wrong as long as they treat every religion equally.

Communalism The problem begins when religion is seen as the basis of the nation.

The example of Northern Ireland in Chapter 3 shows the dangers of such an approach to nationalism.

The problem becomes more acute when religion is expressed in politics in exclusive and partisan
terms, when one religion and its followers are pitted against another. This happens when beliefs of
one religion are presented as superior to those of other religions, when the demands of one
religious group are formed in opposition to another and when state power is used to establish
domination of one religious group over the rest. This manner of using religion in politics is
communal politics.

Communal politics is based on the idea that religion is the principal basis of social community.

Communalism involves thinking Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e along the following lines. The
followers of a particular religion must belong to one community.

Their fundamental interests are the same. Any difference that they may have is irrelevant or trivial
for community life. It also follows that people who follow different religions cannot belong to the
same social community. If the followers of different religions have some commonalities these are
superficial and immaterial, their interests are bound to be different and involve a conflict. In its
extreme form, communalism leads to the belief that people belonging to different religions cannot
live as equal citizens within one nation. Either, one of them has to dominate the rest or they have
to form different nations.

This belief is fundamentally flawed. People of one religion do not have the same interests and
aspirations in every context.

Everyone has several other roles, positions and identities. There are many voices inside every
community. All these voices have a right to be heard. Therefore any attempt to bring all followers
of one religion together in context other than religion is bound to suppress many voices within that
community.

Communalism can take various forms in politics:  The most common expression of communalism is in
everyday beliefs. These routinely involve religious prejudices, stereotypes of religious communities
and belief in the superiority of one’s religion over other religions. This is so common Family laws:
Those laws that deal with family related matters such as marriage, divorce, adoption, inheritance,
etc.

In our country, different family laws apply to followers of different religions. that we often fail
to notice it, even when we believe in it.  A communal mind often leads to a quest for political
dominance of one’s own religious community. For those belonging to majority community, this takes
the form of majoritarian dominance. For those belonging to the minority community, it can take the
form of a desire to form a separate political unit.  Political mobilisation on religious lines is
another frequent form of communalism. This involves the use of sacred symbols, religious leaders,
emotional appeal and plain fear in order to bring the followers of one religion together in the
political arena. In electoral politics, this often involves special appeal to the interests or
emotions of voters of one religion in preference to others.  Sometimes communalism takes its most
ugly form of communal violence, riots and massacre. India and Pakistan suffered some of the worst
communal riots at the time of the Partition. The post-Independence period has also seen large scale
communal violence.

Secular state Communalism was and continues to be one of the major challenges to democracy in our
country. The makers of our Constitution were aware of this challenge. That is why, they chose the
model of a secular state. This choice was reflected in several constitutional provisions that we
studied last year:  There is no official religion for the Indian state. Unlike the status of
Buddhism in Sri Lanka, that of Islam I often crack jokes about people from one religion. Does that
make me communal? De moc ra tic Polit ics in Pakistan and that of Christianity in England, our
Constitution does not give a special status to any religion.  The Constitution provides to all
individuals and communities freedom to profess, practice and propagate any religion, or not to
follow any. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion.  At the same time,
the Constitution allows the state to intervene in the matters of religion in order to ensure
equality within religious communities. For example, it bans untouchability.

Understood in this sense, secularism is not just an ideology of some parties or persons. This idea
constitutes one of the foundations of our country. Communalism should not be seen as a threat to
some people in India. It threatens the very idea of India. That is why communalism needs to be
combated.

A secular Constitution like ours is necessary but not sufficient to combat communalism. Communal
prejudices and propaganda need to be countered in everyday life and religion- based mobilisation
needs to be countered in the arena of politics.