Decentralisation in India



Fe d era lism 25 elected by all the adult population living in that ward or village. It is the
decision-making body for the entire village. The panchayat works under the overall supervision of
the gram sabha. All the voters in the village are its members. It has to meet at least twice or
thrice in a year to approve the annual budget of the gram panchayat and to review the performance of
the gram panchayat.

The local government structure goes right up to the district level. A few gram panchayats are
grouped together to form what is usually called a panchayat samiti or block or mandal. The members
of this representative body are elected by all the panchyat members in that area.

All the panchayat samitis or mandals in a district together constitute the zilla (district)
parishad. Most members of the zilla parishad are elected. Members of the Lok Sabha and MLAs of that
district and some other officials of other district level bodies are also its members. Zilla
parishad chairperson is the political head of the zilla parishad.

Similarly, local government bodies exist for urban areas as well. Municipalities are set up in
towns. Big cities are constituted into municipal corporations. Both municipalities and municipal
corporations are controlled by elected bodies consisting of people’s representatives. Municipal
chairperson is the political head of the municipality. In a municipal corporation, such an officer
is called the mayor.

Prime Minister runs the country.

Chief Minister runs the state.

Logically, then, the chairperson of Zilla Parishad should run the district.

Why does the D.M. or Collector administer the district?

What do these newspaper clippings have to say about efforts of decentralisation in India? 26 De moc
ra tic Polit ics This new system of local government is the largest experiment in democracy
conducted anywhere in the world. There are now about 36 lakh elected representatives in the
panchayats and municipalities etc., all over the country. This number is bigger than the population
of many countries in the world.

Constitutional status for local government has helped to deepen democracy in our country. It has
also increased women’s representation and voice in our democracy. At the same time, there are many
difficulties. While elections are held regularly and enthusiastically, gram sabhas are not held
regularly.

Most state governments have not transferred significant powers to the local governments. Nor have
they given adequate resources. We are thus still a long way from realising the ideal of self-
government.

Find out about the local government in the village or town you live in.

If you live in a village, find out the names of the following: your panch or ward member, your
sarpanch, your panchayat samiti, the chairperson of your zilla parishad. Also find out when did the
last meeting of the gram sabha take place and how many people took part in that.

If you live in urban areas, find out the name of your municipal councillor, and the municipal
chairperson or mayor. Also find out about the budget of your municipal corporation, municipality and
the major items on which money was spent. + An experiment in Brazil A city called Porto Alegre in
Brazil has carried out an extraordinary experiment in combining decentralisation with participative
democracy. The city has set up a parallel organisation operating alongside the municipal council,
enabling local inhabitants to take real decisions for their city. The nearly 13 lakh people in this
city get to participate in making the budget for their own city. The city is divided into many
sectors or what we call wards. Each sector has a meeting, like that of the gram sabha, in which
anyone living in that area can participate. There are meetings. The proposals are put to the
municipality that takes a final decision about it.

This method has ensured that the money cannot be spent only for the benefit of the colonies where
rich people live. Buses now run to the poor colonies and builders cannot evict slum-dwellers without
resettling them.

In our own country, a similar experiment has taken place in some areas in Kerala. Ordinary people
have participated in making a plan for the development of their locality.

Fe d era lism 27 1. Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India: Manipur,
Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa. 2. Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on a
blank outline political map of the world. 3. Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in
India that is similar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium. 4. What is the main
difference between a federal form of government and a unitary one? Explain with an example. 5. State
any two differences between the local government before and after the Constitutional amendment in
1992. 6. Fill in the blanks: Since the United States is a ­___________________ type of federation,
all the constituent States have equal powers and States are ______________vis-à-vis the federal
government. But India is a _____________________ type of federation and some States have more power
than others. In India, the ____________ government has more powers. 7. Here are three reactions to
the language policy followed in India.

Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions.

Sangeeta : The policy of accommodation has strengthened national unity.

Arman : Language-based States have divided us by making everyone conscious of their language.

Harish : This policy has only helped to consolidate the dominance of English over all other
languages. 8. The distinguishing feature of a federal government is: (a)    National government
gives some powers to the provincial governments. (b)        Power is distributed among the
legislature, executive and judiciary. (d)        Governmental power is divided between different
levels of government. 9. A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are given here.
Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists as provided in the table below.

A. Defence; B. Police; C. Agriculture; D. Education; E. Banking; F. Forests; G. Communications; H.
Trade; I. Marriages Union List State List Concurrent List 28 De moc ra tic Polit ics 1 2 3 4 (a) D A
B C (b) B C D A (c) A C D B (d) C D A B 10.     Examine the following pairs that give the level of
government in India and the powers of the government at that level to make laws on the subjects
mentioned against each. Which of the following pairs is not correctly matched? 11.   Match List I
with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: List I List II 1.
Union of India A. Prime Minister 2. State B. Sarpanch 3. Municipal Corporation C. Governor 4. Gram
Panchayat D. Mayor 12.      Consider the following two statements.

A. In a federation, the powers of the federal and provincial governments are clearly demarcated.

B. India is a federation because the powers of the Union and State Governments are specified in the
Constitution and they have exclusive jurisdiction on their respective subjects.

C. Sri Lanka is a federation because the country is divided into provinces.

D. India is no longer a federation because some powers of the States have been devolved to the local
government bodies.

Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B and C (b) A, C and D (c) A and B only (d)
B and C only (a) State government State List (b) Central government Union List (c) Central and State
governments Concurrent List (d) Local governments Residuary powers