2.6 Indian Trade, Colonialism and the Global System



Historically, fine cottons produced in India were exported to Europe. With industrialisation,
British cotton manufacture began to expand, and industrialists pressurised the government to
restrict cotton imports and protect local industries. Tariffs were imposed on cloth imports into
Britain. Consequently, the inflow of fine Indian cotton began to decline.

From the early nineteenth century, British manufacturers also began to seek overseas markets for
their cloth. Excluded from the British The testimony of an indentured labourer Extract from the
testimony of Ram Narain Tewary, an indentured labourer who spent ten years on Demerara in the early
twentieth century. ‘… in spite of my best efforts, I could not properly do the works that were
allotted to me ... In a few days I got my hands bruised all over and I could not go to work for a
week for which I was prosecuted and sent to jail for 14 days. ... new emigrants find the tasks
allotted to them extremely heavy and cannot complete them in a day. ... Deductions are also made
from wages if the work is considered to have been done unsatisfactorily. Many people cannot
therefore earn their full wages and are punished in various ways. In fact, the labourers have to
spend their period of indenture in great trouble …’ in other international markets. If we look at
the figures of exports from India, we see a steady decline of the share of cotton textiles: from
some 30 per cent around 1800 to 15 per cent by 1815. By the 1870s this proportion had dropped to
below 3 per cent.

What, then, did India export? The figures again tell a dramatic story. While exports of manufactures
declined rapidly, export of raw materials increased equally fast. Between 1812 and 1871, the share
of raw cotton exports rose from 5 per cent to 35 per cent.

Indigo used for dyeing cloth was another important export for All through the seventeenth and early
eighteenth centuries, Surat remained the main centre of overseas trade in the western Indian Ocean.

The Making of a Global World China grew rapidly from the 1820s to become for a while India’s single
largest export. Britain grew opium in India and exported it to China and, with the money earned
through this sale, it financed its tea and other imports from China.

Over the nineteenth century, British manufactures flooded the Indian market. Food grain and raw
material exports from India to Britain and the rest of the world increased. But the value of British
exports to India was much higher than the value of British imports from India. Thus Britain had a
‘trade surplus’ with India. Britain used this surplus to balance its trade deficits with other
countries – that is, with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was selling to.
This is how a multilateral settlement system works – it allows one country’s deficit with another
country to be settled by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain balance its deficits,
India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century world economy.

Britain’s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called ‘home charges’ that included private
remittances home by British officials and traders, interest payments on India’s external debt, and
pensions of British officials in India.

Surat Goa Madras Masulipatam Hoogly Bangkok Hanoi Canton Malacca Batavia Bantam Acheh Muscat Bandar
Abbas Basra Aleppo Alexandria Jedda Macha Lahore Bukhara Yarkand The Great Wall Mombasa Mozambique
Sea route Land route Volume of trade passing through the port Red Sea Persian Gulf Indian Ocean