4.2 Print Culture and the French Revolution



Many historians have argued that print culture created the conditions within which French Revolution
occurred. Can we make such a connection? Three types of arguments have been usually put forward.

First: print popularised the ideas of the Enlightenment thinkers.

Collectively, their writings provided a critical commentary on tradition, superstition and
despotism. They argued for the rule of reason rather than custom, and demanded that everything be
judged through the application of reason and rationality. They attacked the sacred authority of the
Church and the despotic power of the state, thus eroding the legitimacy of a social order based on
tradition. The writings of Voltaire and Rousseau were read widely; and those who read these books
saw the world through new eyes, eyes that were questioning, critical and rational.

Second: print created a new culture of dialogue and debate. All values, norms and institutions were
re-evaluated and discussed by a public that had become aware of the power of reason, and recognised
the need to question existing ideas and beliefs. Within this public culture, new ideas of social
revolution came into being.

Third: by the 1780s there was an outpouring of literature that mocked the royalty and criticised
their morality. In the process, it raised This is how Mercier describes the impact of the printed
word, and the power of reading in one of his books: ‘Anyone who had seen me reading would have my
lamp with extraordinary caution, I threw myself hungrily into the reading. An easy eloquence,
effortless and animated, carried me from one page to the next without my noticing it. A clock struck
off the hours in the silence of the shadows, and I heard nothing. My lamp began to run out of oil
and produced only a pale light, but still I read on. I could not even take out time to raise the
wick for fear of interrupting my pleasure. How those new ideas rushed into my brain! How my
intelligence adopted them!’ Quoted by Robert Darnton, The Forbidden Best- Sellers of Pre-
Revolutionary France, 1995. absolute power is exercised by an individual, unregulated by legal and
constitutional checks Why do some historians think that print culture created the basis for the
French Revolution? sensual pleasures while the common people suffered immense hardships. This
literature circulated underground and led to the growth of hostile sentiments against the monarchy.

How do we look at these arguments? There can be no doubt that print helps the spread of ideas. But
we must remember that people did not read just one kind of literature. If they read the ideas of
Voltaire and Rousseau, they were also exposed to monarchical and Church propaganda. They were not
influenced directly by everything they read or saw. They accepted some ideas and rejected others.

They interpreted things their own way. Print did not directly shape their minds, but it did open up
the possibility of thinking differently.

The cartoon shows how the ordinary people – peasants, artisans and workers – had a hard time while
the nobility enjoyed life and oppressed them. Circulation of cartoons like this one had an impact on
the thinking of people before the revolution. would have appeared in a pamphlet.