What makes India a federal country?



We have earlier seen how small countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka face so many problems of
managing diversity. What about a vast country like India, with so many languages, religions and
regions? What are the power sharing arrangements in our country?

Let us begin with the Constitution.

India had emerged as an independent nation after a painful and bloody partition. Soon after
Independence, several princely states became a part of the country. The Constitution declared India
as a Union of States.

Although it did not use the word federation, the Indian Union is based on the principles of
federalism.

Let us go back to the seven features of federalism mentioned above. We can see that all these
features apply to the provisions of the Indian Constitution. The Constitution originally provided
for a two-tier system of government, the Union Government or what we call the Central Government,
representing the Union of India and the State governments. Later, a third tier of federalism was
added in the form of Panchayats and Municipalities. As in any federation, these different tiers
enjoy separate jurisdiction. The Constitution clearly provided a three-fold distribution of
legislative powers between the Union Government and the State Governments. Thus, it contains three
lists:  Union List includes subjects of national importance, such as defence of the country,
foreign affairs, banking, communications and currency. They are included in this list because we
need a uniform policy on these matters throughout the country. The Union Government alone can make
laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the Union List.  State List contains subjects of State
and local importance, such as police, trade, commerce, agriculture and irrigation. The State
Governments alone can make laws relating to the subjects mentioned in the State List.  Concurrent
List includes subjects of common interest to both the Union Government as well as the State
Governments, such What makes India a federal country?

Fe d era lism 17 as education, forest, trade unions, marriage, adoption and succession.

Both the Union as well as the State Governments can make laws on the subjects mentioned in this
list.

If their laws conflict with each other, the law made by the Union Government will prevail.

What about subjects that do not fall in any of the three lists? Or subjects like computer software
that came up after the constitution was made?

According to our constitution, the Union Government has the power to legislate on these ‘residuary’
subjects.

We noted above that most federations that are formed by ‘holding together’ do not give equal power
to its constituent units. Thus, all States in the Indian Union do not have identical powers. Some
States enjoy a special status. States such as Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram enjoy
special powers under certain provisions of the Constitution of India (Article 371) due to their
peculiar social and historical circumstances. These special powers are especially enjoyed in
relation to the protection of land rights of indigenous peoples, their culture and also preferential
employment in government services.

Indians who are not permanent residents of this State cannot buy land or house here. Similar special
provisions exist for some other States of India as well.

Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All India Radio daily for one
week. Make a list of news items related to government policies or decisions by classifying these
into the following categories:  News items that relate only to the Central Government,  News items
that relate only to your or any other State Government,  News items about the relationship between
the Central and State Governments.

There are some units of the Indian Union which enjoy very little power. These are areas which are
too small to become an independent State but which could not be merged with any of the existing
States.

These areas, like Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the capital city of Delhi, are called Union
Territories.

These territories do not have the powers of a State. The Central Government has special powers in
running these areas.

This sharing of power between the Union Government and the State Governments is basic to the
structure of the Constitution. It is not easy to make changes to this power sharing arrangement. The
Parliament cannot on its own change this arrangement.

Any change to it has to be first passed by both the Houses of Parliament with at least two-thirds
majority.

Then it has to be ratified by the legislatures of at least half of the total States.

The judiciary plays an important role in overseeing the implementation of constitutional provisions
and procedures. In case of any dispute about the division of powers, the High Courts and the Supreme
Court make a decision. The Union and State Governments have the power to raise resources by levying
taxes in order to carry on the government and the responsibilities assigned to each of them.

If agriculture and commerce are state subjects, why do we have ministers of agriculture and commerce
in the Union cabinet? 18 De moc ra tic Polit ics  Pokharan, the place where India conducted its
nuclear tests, lies in Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to the Central
Government’s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of India from conducting the nuclear
tests?  Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools. But the
Union Government does not like the style and content of the new textbooks. In that case, does the
state government need to take permission from the Union Government before these textbooks can be
launched?  Suppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have different
policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can the Prime Minister of India
intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers will have to obey?

Fe d era lism 19 Constitutional provisions are necessary for the success of federalism but these are
not sufficient. If the federal experiment has succeeded in India, it is not merely because of the
clearly laid out constitutional provisions. The real success of federalism in India can be
attributed to the nature of democratic politics in our country. This ensured that the spirit of
federalism, respect for diversity and desire for living together became shared ideals in our
country. Let us look at some of the major ways in which this happened.

Linguistic States The creation of linguistic States was the first and a major test for democratic
politics in our country.

If you look at the political map of India when it began its journey as a democracy in 1947 and that
of 2019, you will be surprised by the extent of the changes. Many old States have vanished and many
new States have been created. Areas, boundaries and names of the States have been changed.

In 1947, the boundaries of several old States of India were changed in order to create new States.
This was done to ensure that people who spoke the same language lived in the same State. Some States
were created not on the basis of language but to recognise differences based on culture, ethnicity
or geography.

These include States like Nagaland, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand.  Has your village / town / city
remained under the same State since Independence? If not, what was the name of the earlier State? 
Can you identify names of three States in 1947 that have been changed later?  Identify any three
States which have been carved out of bigger States.