1.2 The Rowlatt Act



Emboldened with this success, Gandhiji in 1919 decided to launch a nationwide satyagraha against the
proposed Rowlatt Act (1919). This Act had been hurriedly passed through the Imperial Legislative
Council despite the united opposition of the Indian members. It gave the government enormous powers
to repress political activities, and allowed detention of political prisoners without trial for two
years. Mahatma Gandhi wanted non-violent civil disobedience against such unjust laws, which would
start with a hartal on 6 April.

Rallies were organised in various cities, workers went on strike in railway workshops, and shops
closed down. Alarmed by the popular upsurge, and scared that lines of communication such as the
railways and telegraph would be disrupted, the British administration decided to clamp down on
nationalists. Local leaders were picked up from Amritsar, and Mahatma Gandhi was barred from
entering Delhi.

On 10 April, the police in Amritsar fired upon a peaceful procession, provoking widespread attacks
on banks, post offices and railway stations. Martial law was imposed and General Dyer took command.

Mahatma Gandhi on Satyagraha ‘It is said of “passive resistance” that it is the weapon of the weak,
but the power which is the subject of this article can be used only by the strong. This power is not
passive resistance; indeed it calls for intense activity. The movement in South Africa was not
passive but active … ‘ Satyagraha is not physical force. A satyagrahi does not inflict pain on the
adversary; he does not seek his destruction … In the use of satyagraha, there is no ill-will
whatever. ‘ Satyagraha is pure soul-force. Truth is the very substance of the soul. That is why this
force is called satyagraha. The soul is informed with knowledge. In it burns the flame of love. …
Non- violence is the supreme dharma … ‘It is certain that India cannot rival Britain or Europe in
force of arms. The British worship the war-god and they can all of them become, as they are
becoming, bearers of arms. The hundreds of millions in India can never carry arms.

They have made the religion of non-violence their own ...’ active resistance? that day a large crowd
gathered in the enclosed ground of Jallianwalla Bagh. Some came to protest against the government’s
new repressive measures. Others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi fair. Being from outside the
city, many villagers were unaware of the martial law that had been imposed. Dyer entered the area,
blocked the exit points, and opened fire on the crowd, killing hundreds. His object, as he declared
later, was to ‘produce a moral effect’, to create in the minds of satyagrahis a feeling of terror
and awe.

As the news of Jallianwalla Bagh spread, crowds took to the streets in many north Indian towns.
There were strikes, clashes with the police and attacks on government buildings. The government
responded with brutal repression, seeking to humiliate and terrorise people: satyagrahis were forced
to rub their noses on the ground, crawl on the streets, and do salaam (salute) to all sahibs; people
were flogged and villages (around Gujranwala in Punjab, now in Pakistan) were bombed. Seeing
violence spread, Mahatma Gandhi called off the movement.

While the Rowlatt satyagraha had been a widespread movement, it was still limited mostly to cities
and towns. Mahatma Gandhi now felt the need to launch a more broad-based movement in India. But he
was certain that no such movement could be organised without bringing the Hindus and Muslims closer
together. One way of doing this, he felt, was to take up the Khilafat issue. The First World War had
ended with the defeat of Ottoman Turkey. And there were rumours that a harsh peace treaty was going
to be imposed on the Ottoman emperor – the spiritual head of the Islamic world (the Khalifa). To
defend the Khalifa’s temporal powers, a Khilafat Committee was formed in Bombay in March 1919. A
young generation of Muslim leaders like the brothers Muhammad Ali and Shaukat Ali, began Muslims
under the umbrella of a unified national movement. At the Calcutta session of the Congress in
September 1920, he convinced other leaders of the need to start a non-cooperation movement in
support of Khilafat as well as for swaraj.