4.2 Where Did the Workers Come From?



Factories needed workers. With the expansion of factories, this demand increased. In 1901, there
were 584,000 workers in Indian factories. By 1946 the number was over 2,436, 000. Where did the
workers come from? In most industrial regions workers came from the districts around.

Peasants and artisans who found no work in the village went to the industrial centres in search of
work. Over 50 per cent workers in the Bombay cotton industries in 1911 came from the neighbouring
district of Ratnagiri, while the mills of Kanpur got most of their textile hands from the villages
within the district of Kanpur. Most often millworkers moved between the village and the city,
returning to their village homes during harvests and festivals.

Over time, as news of employment spread, workers travelled great distances in the hope of work in
the mills. From the United Provinces, for instance, they went to work in the textile mills of Bombay
and in the jute mills of Calcutta.

In 1912, J.N. Tata set up the first iron and steel works in India at Jamshedpur. Iron and steel
industries in India started much later than textiles. In colonial India industrial machinery,
railways and locomotives were mostly imported.

So capital goods industries could not really develop in any significant way till Independence.

When workers went back to their village homes, they liked dressing up.

Getting jobs was always difficult, even when mills multiplied and the demand for workers increased.
The numbers seeking work were always more than the jobs available. Entry into the mills was also
restricted. Industrialists usually employed a jobber to get new recruits.

Very often the jobber was an old and trusted worker. He got people from his village, ensured them
jobs, helped them settle in the city and provided them money in times of crisis. The jobber
therefore became a person with some authority and power. He began demanding money and gifts for his
favour and controlling the lives of workers.

The number of factory workers increased over time. However, as you will see, they were a small
proportion of the total industrial workforce.

Vasant Parkar, who was once a millworker in Bombay, said: ‘The workers would pay the jobbers money
to get their sons work in the mill … The mill worker was closely associated with his village,
physically and emotionally. He would go home to cut the harvest and for sowing. The Konkani would go
home to cut the paddy and the Ghati, the sugarcane. It was an accepted practice for which the mills
granted leave.’ Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred Years: One Hundred Voices, 2004.
recollected his childhood in the 1930s and 1940s: ‘In those days, the shift was 10 hours – from 5 pm
to 3 am – terrible working hours. My father worked for 35 years; he got the asthma like disease and
could not work any more…Then my father went back to village.’ Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One
Hundred Years: One Hundred Voices. emphasise the jobber’s position of authority.

The Age of Industrialisation meeting and forming Chambers of Commerce to regulate business and
decide on issues of collective concern.