Gender and politics



Let us begin with gender division.

This is a form of hierarchical social division seen everywhere, but is rarely recognised in the
study of politics. The gender division tends to be understood as natural and unchangeable. However,
it is not based on biology but on social expectations and stereotypes.

Public/private division Boys and girls are brought up to believe that the main responsibility of
women is housework and bringing up children. This is reflected in a sexual division of labour in
most families: women do all work inside the home such as cooking, cleaning, washing clothes,
tailoring, looking after children, etc., and men do all the work outside the home. It is not that
men cannot do housework; they simply think that it is for women to attend to these things. When
these jobs are paid for, men are ready to take up these works. Most tailors or cooks in hotels are
men. Similarly, it is not that women do not work outside their home. In villages, women fetch water,
collect fuel and work in the fields. In urban areas, poor women work as domestic helper in middle
class homes, while middle class women work in offices.

In fact, the majority of women do some sort of paid work in addition to domestic labour. But their
work is not valued and does not get recognition.

The result of this division of labour is that although women constitute half of the humanity, their
role in public life, especially politics, is minimal in most societies. Earlier, only men were
allowed to participate in public affairs, vote and contest for public offices. Gradually the gender
issue was raised in politics.

Women in different parts of the world organised and agitated for equal rights. There were agitations
in different countries for the extension of voting rights to women.

A poster from Bengal affirming women’s strength.

Sexual division of labour: A system in which all work inside the home is either done by the women of
the family, or organised by them through the domestic helpers.

Why not? If politics is about power, then surely male dominance in the household should be
considered political.

Why are we work in this textbook on Political Science? Is this politics? © Zuban Ge nde r , R elig
io n and C ast e These agitations demanded enhancing the political and legal status of women and
improving their educational and career opportunities.

More radical women’s movements aimed at equality in personal and family life as well. These
movements are called feminist movements.

Political expression of gender division and political mobilisation Feminist: A woman or a man who
believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men. © Zuban on this question helped to
improve women’s role in public life. We now find women working as scientists, doctors, engineers,
lawyers, managers and college and university teachers which were earlier not considered suitable for
women. In some parts of the world, for example in Scandinavian countries, such as Sweden, Norway and
Finland, the De moc ra tic Polit ics Patriarchy: Literally, rule by father, this concept is used to
refer to a system that values men more and gives them power over women.

Activities Men Women Income generating work 6:00 2:40 Household and related work 0:30 5:00 Talking,
Gossip 1:25 1:20 No work/ Leisure 3:40 3:50 Sleep, self-care, reading etc. 12:25 11:10 Daily time
use (hours: minutes) A ‘time use survey’ was conducted in six states of our country. It shows that
an average woman works every day for a little over seven and half hours while an average man works
for six and a half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because most of their work leads
to generation of income. Women also do a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their
work is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible. participation of women in public
life is very high.

In our country, women still lag much behind men despite some improvement since Independence.

Ours is still a male-dominated, patriarchal society. Women face disadvantage, discrimination and
oppression in various ways:  The literacy rate among women is only 54 per cent compared with 76 per
cent among men. Similarly, a smaller proportion of girl students go for higher studies. When we You
can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household. Observe all the adult male and female
members of your family for one week. Every day note down the number of hours each of them spends on
the following activities: income generating activity (working at the office or shop or factory or
field, etc.), household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching water, looking after
children or elders, etc.), reading and recreation, talking/gossiping, self-care, taking rest or
sleeping. If necessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each activity for a week and
calculate the daily average for each activity for each member. Do women work more in your family as
well? Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e Mummy always says to outsiders: “I don’t work. I am a
housewife.” But I see her working non-stop all the time. If what she does is not work, what else is
work? some places. But they drop out because parents prefer to spend their resources for their boys’
education rather than spending equally on their sons and daughters.  No wonder the proportion of
women among the highly paid and valued jobs, is still very small. On an average, an Indian woman
works one hour more than an average man every day. Yet much of her work is not paid and therefore,
often not valued.  The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 provides that equal wages should be paid to
equal work.

However in almost all areas of work, from sports and cinema, to factories and fields, women are paid
less than men, even when both do exactly the same work.  In many parts of India, parents prefer to
have sons and find ways to have the girl child aborted before she is born. Such sex-selective
abortion led to a decline in child sex ratio (number of girl children per thousand boys) in the
country to merely 919. As the map shows, this Can you identify your State on this it? How is it
different from others with a different colour? Identify the States which have child sex ratio below
900. on the next page.

How do the two of them tell us about the same issue? © Oxfam GB ratio has fallen below 850 or even
800 in some States.

There are reports of various kinds of harassment, exploitation and violence against women. Urban
areas have become particularly unsafe for women. They are not safe even within their own home from
beating, harassment and other forms of domestic violence.

Women’s political representation All this is well known. Yet issues related to women’s well being or
otherwise are not given adequate attention. This has led many feminists and women’s movements to the
conclusion that unless women control power, their problems will not get adequate attention. One way
to ensure this is to have more women as elected representatives.

In India, the proportion of women in legislature has been very low. For example, the percentage of
elected women members in Lok Sabha has touched 14.36 per cent of its total strength for the first
time in 2019. Their share in the state assemblies is less than 5 per cent.

In this respect, India is among the Could you think of some reasons why women’s representation is so
low in India? Do you think Americas and Europe have achieved a satisfactory level of women’s
representation? Women in national parliaments in different regions of the world (in%) Note: Figures
are for the per cent of women in the directly elected houses of parliament as on 1 October 2018.
countries Americas Europe Sub- Saharan Africa Pacific Arab States Region Asia World Average India
29.5 42.3 26.4 23.7 19.8 18.6 15.6 11.8 Ge nde r , R elig io n and C ast e If casteism and
communalism are bad, what makes feminism a good thing? Why don’t we oppose all those who divide the
society on any lines – caste, religion or gender? bottom group of nations in the world (see the
graph below). India is behind the averages for several developing countries of Africa and Latin
America. In the government, cabinets are largely all-male even when a woman becomes the Chief
Minister or the Prime Minister.

One way to solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in
the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local
government bodies – in panchayats and municipalities – are now reserved for women. Now there are
more than 10 lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban local bodies.

Women’s organizations and activists had been demanding a similar reservation of at least one- third
of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies for women. A bill with this proposal was pending before
the Parliament for many decades. In 2023, Nari shakti Vandan Adhiniyam (Womens’ Reservation Act,
2023) has been passed which will give 33 percent reservation of seats for women in Lok Sabha, State
Legislative Assemblies and also Delhi Assembly.

Gender division is an example that some form of social division needs to be expressed in politics.
This also shows that disadvantaged groups do benefit when social divisions become a political issue.
Do you think that women could have made the gains we noted above if their unequal treatment was not
raised in the political domain? De moc ra tic Polit ics