2 Hand Labour and Steam Power



In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of human labour. Poor peasants and vagrants moved to the
cities in large numbers in search of jobs, waiting for work. As you will know, when there is plenty
of labour, wages are low. So industrialists had no problem of labour shortage or high wage costs.
They did not want to introduce machines that got rid of human labour and required large capital
investment.

In many industries the demand for labour was seasonal. Gas works and breweries were especially busy
through the cold months. So they needed more workers to meet their peak demand. Book- binders and
printers, catering to Christmas demand, too needed extra hands before December. At the waterfront,
winter was the time that ships were repaired and spruced up. In all such industries where production
fluctuated with the season, industrialists usually preferred hand labour, employing workers for the
season.

Will Thorne is one of those who went in search of seasonal work, loading bricks and doing odd jobs.
He describes how job-seekers walked to London in search of work: ‘I had always wanted to go to
London, and my desire … was stimulated by letters from an old workmate … who was now working at the
Old Kent Road Gas Works … I finally decided to go … in November, 1881. With two friends I started
out to walk the journey, filled with the hope that we would be able to obtain employment, when we
get there, with the kind assistance of my friend … we had little money when we started, not enough
to pay for our food and lodgings each night until we arrived in London.

Some days we walked as much as twenty miles, and other days less. Our money was gone at the end of
the third day … For two nights we slept out – once under a haystack, and once in an old farm shed …
On arrival in London we tried to find … my friend … but … were unsuccessful.

Our money was gone, so there was nothing for us to do but to walk around until late at night, and
then try to find some place to sleep. We found an old building and slept in it that night.

The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for work.
To my great surprise, the man we had been looking for was working at the time. He spoke to the
foreman and I was given a job.’ Quoted in Raphael Samuel, ‘Comers and Goers’, in H.J. Dyos and
Michael Wolff, eds, The Victorian City: Images and Realities, 1973. labour. Machines were oriented
to producing uniforms, standardised goods for a mass market. But the demand in the market was often
for goods with intricate designs and specific shapes. In mid-nineteenth-century Britain, for
instance, 500 varieties of Some people were always on the move selling small goods and looking for
temporary work. persuade you to buy a new machine. Explain in your letter what you have heard and
why you do not wish to invest in the new technology. human skill, not mechanical technology.

In Victorian Britain, the upper classes – the aristocrats and the bourgeoisie – preferred things
produced by hand. Handmade products came to symbolise refinement and class. They were better
finished, individually produced, and carefully designed. Machine- made goods were for export to the
colonies.

In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using mechanical power so that the
need for human labour can be minimised. This was the case in nineteenth-century America. Britain,
however, had no problem hiring human hands.