SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT



many new components have been added to the Human Development Report but, by pre-fixing Human to
Development, it has made it very clear that what is important in development is what is happening to
citizens of a country. It is people, their health, their well being, that is most important.

Do you think there are certain other aspects that should be considered in measuring human
development? LET’S UNDERSTAND WHY FOLLOWING EXAMPLE: “We have not inherited the world from our
forefathers — we have borrowed it from our children.” EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT Groundwater is an
example of renewable resources. These resources are replenished by nature as in the case of crops
and plants. However, even these resources may be overused. For example, in the case of groundwater,
if we use more than what is being replenished by rain then we would be overusing this resource.

FOR EXAMPLE, CRUDE OIL THAT WE RENEWABLE RESOURCE. HOWEVER WE NOT KNOW OF EARLIER. EXPLORATIONS
Example 2: Example 2: Example 2: Example 2: Example 2: Exhaustion of Exhaustion of Exhaustion of
Exhaustion of Exhaustion of Natural Resources Natural Resources Natural Resources Natural Resources
Natural Resources Look at the following data for crude oil.

Region/Country Reserves (2017) Number of Years (Thousand Million Barrels) Reserves will last Middle
East United States of America 10.5 World The table gives an estimate of reserves of crude oil
(column1). More important, it also tells us for how many years the stock of crude oil will last if
people continue to extract it at the present rate. The reserves would last only 50 years more. This
is for the world as a whole. However, different countries face different situations. Countries like
India depend on importing oil from abroad because they do not have enough stocks of their own. If
prices of oil increase this becomes a burden for everyone.

There are countries like USA which have low reserves and hence want to secure oil through military
or economic power.

SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT new issues about the nature and process of development. (a) Is crude
oil essential for the development process in a country? Discuss. (b) India has to import crude oil.
What problems do you anticipate for the country looking at the above situation? Non-renewable
resources are those which will get exhausted after a few years of use. We have a fixed stock on
earth which cannot be replenished. We do discover new resources that we did not know of earlier. New
sources in this way add to the stock. However, over time, even this will get exhausted.

TABLE 1.7 CRUDE OIL RESERVES Source : Energy Institute’s Statistical Review of World Energy, 2024.
1. Development of a country can generally be determined by (i) its per capita income (ii) its
average literacy level (iii) health status of its people (iv) all the above 2. Which of the
following neighbouring countries has better performance in terms of human development than India?
(i) Bangladesh (ii) Sri Lanka (iii) Nepal (iv) Pakistan 3. Assume there are four families in a
country. The average per capita income of these families is Rs 5000. If the income of three families
is Rs 4000, Rs 7000 and Rs 3000 respectively, what is the income of the fourth family? (i) Rs 7500
(ii) Rs 3000 (iii) Rs 2000 (iv) Rs 6000 4. What is the main criterion used by the World Bank in
classifying different countries? What are the limitations of this criterion, if any? 5. In what
respects is the criterion used by the UNDP for measuring development different from the one used by
the World Bank? 6. Why do we use averages? Are there any limitations to their use? Illustrate with
your own examples related to development. 7. Kerala, with lower per capita income has a better human
development ranking than Haryana. Hence, per capita income is not a useful criterion at all and
should not be used to compare states. Do you agree? Discuss. 8. Find out the present sources of
energy that are used by the people in India. What could be the other possibilities fifty years from
now? 9. Why is the issue of sustainability important for development? Consequences of environmental
degradation do not respect national or state boundaries; this issue is no longer region or nation
specific.

Our future is linked together.

SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT comparatively a new area of knowledge in which scientists, economists,
philosophers and other social scientists are working together.

In general, the question of development or progress is perennial.

At all times as a member of society and as individuals we need to ask where we want to go, what we
wish to become and what our goals are. So the debate on development continues.

UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL EVELOPMENT
OPMENT OPMENT 10. “The Earth has enough resources to meet the needs of all but not enough to satisfy
the greed of even one person”. How is this statement relevant to the disscusion of development?
Discuss. 11. List a few examples of environmental degradation that you may have observed around you.
12. For each of the items given in Table 1.6, find out which country is at the top and which is at
the bottom. 13. The following table shows the proportion of adults (aged 15-49 years) whose BMI is
below normal (BMI <18.5 kg/m2) in India. It is based on a survey of various State Male Female (%)
(%) Kerala 8.5 Karnataka Madhya Pradesh All States EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT (i) Compare the nutritional
level of people in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh. (ii) Can you guess why around one-fifth of people in
the country are undernourished even though it is argued that there is enough food in the country?
Describe in your own words.

Invite three different speakers to talk to you about the development of your region. Ask group
should prepare a wall chart, giving reasons about ideas that you agree or do not agree with.

Source: National Family Health Survey-5, 2019-21, http://rchiips.org