HOW TO COMPARE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES OR STATES?



EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT Country Monthly incomes of citizens (in Rupees) I III V Average Country A
10000 10200 Country B assured of being its fifth citizen but if it is a lottery that decides our
citizenship number then perhaps most of us will prefer to live in country A. Even though both the
countries have identical average income, country A is preferred because it has more equitable
distribution. In this country people are neither very rich nor extremely poor. On the other hand
most citizens in country B are poor and one person is extremely rich. Hence, while average income is
useful for comparison it does not tell us how this income is distributed among people. 1. Give three
examples where an average is used for comparing situations. 2. Why do you think average income is an
important criterion for development? Explain. 3. Besides size of per capita income, what other
property of income is important in comparing two or more societies? 4. Suppose records show that the
average income in a country has been increasing over a period of time. From this, can we conclude
that all sections of the economy have become better? Illustrate your answer with an example. 5. From
the text, find out the per capita income level of about 10-15 low-income countries as per World
Development Reports. 6. Write a paragraph on your notion of what should India do, or achieve, to
become a developed country.

Average Income Average Income Average Income Average Income Average Income While ‘averages’ are
useful for comparison, they also hide disparities Will you be equally happy to live in both these
countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps some of us may like to live in country B if we are
For example, let us consider two countries, A and B. For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed
that they have only five citizens each. Based on Based on Based on Based on Based on data given in
Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table
1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average data given in Table 1.2,
calculate the average income for both the countries. income for both the countries. income for both
the countries. income for both the countries. income for both the countries.

TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO COUNTRY WITH NO RICH AND NO POOR WE CHAIRS USE EVELOPMENT EVELOPMENT WE
CHAIRS TOOK UNDERST NDERST NDERSTANDING ANDING ANDING E E ECONOMIC CONOMIC CONOMIC D D DEVEL EVEL
EVELOPMENT OPMENT OPMENT When we looked at individual aspirations and goals, we found that people
not only think of better income but also have goals such as security, respect for others, equal
treatment, freedom, etc. in mind.

Similarly, when we think of a nation or a region, we may, besides average income, think of other
equally important attributes.