3.3 Print and Dissent



Print and popular religious literature stimulated many distinctive individual interpretations of
faith even among little-educated working people. In the sixteenth century, Menocchio, a miller in
Italy, began to read books that were available in his locality. He reinterpreted the message of the
Bible and formulated a view of God and Creation that enraged the Roman Catholic Church. When the
Roman Church began its inquisition to repress heretical ideas, Menocchio was hauled up twice and
ultimately executed. The Roman Church, troubled by such effects of popular readings and questionings
of faith, imposed severe controls over publishers and booksellers and began to maintain an Index of
Prohibited Books from 1558. for identifying and punishing heretics Heretical – Beliefs which do not
follow the accepted teachings of the Church. In medieval times, heresy was seen as a threat to the
right of the Church to decide on what should be believed and what should not. Heretical beliefs were
severely punished Satiety – The state of being fulfilled much beyond the point of satisfaction
Seditious – Action, speech or writing that is seen as opposing the government Fear of the book
Erasmus, a Latin scholar and a Catholic reformer, who criticised the excesses of Catholicism but
kept his distance from Luther, expressed a deep anxiety about printing. He wrote in Adages (1508):
‘To what corner of the world do they not fly, these swarms of new books? It may be that one here and
there contributes something worth knowing, but the very multitude of them is hurtful to scholarship,
because it creates a glut, and even in good things satiety is most harmful ... [printers] fill the
world with books, not just trifling things (such as I write, perhaps), but stupid, ignorant,
slanderous, scandalous, raving, irreligious and seditious books, and the number of them is such that
even the valuable publications lose their value.’ dramatised in visual representations of the time.
In this highly interesting woodcut the coming of print is associated with the end of the world. The
interior of the printer’s workshop here is the site of a dance of death. Skeletal figures control
the printer and his workers, define and dictate what is to be done and what is to be produced.

Write briefly why some people feared that the development of print could lead to the growth of
dissenting ideas.