1.2 The Pace of Industrial Change



How rapid was the process of industrialisation? Does industrialisation mean only the growth of
factory industries? First: The most dynamic industries in Britain were clearly cotton and metals.
Growing at a rapid pace, cotton was the leading sector in the first phase of industrialisation up to
the 1840s. After that the iron and steel industry led the way. With the expansion of railways, in
England from the 1840s and in the colonies from the 1860s, the demand for iron and steel increased
rapidly. By 1873 Britain was exporting iron and steel worth about £ 77 million, double the value of
its cotton export. industrialisation? Explain your view briefly.

Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional industries. Even at the end of the
nineteenth century, less than 20 per cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically
advanced industrial sectors. Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a large portion of the output was
produced not within factories, but outside, within domestic units.

Third: the pace of change in the ‘traditional’ industries was not set by steam-powered cotton or
metal industries, but they did not remain entirely stagnant either. Seemingly ordinary and small
innovations were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as food processing,
building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture making, and production of implements.

Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly. They did not spread dramatically across the
industrial landscape. New technology was expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious
about using it. The machines often broke down and repair was costly. They were not as effective as
their inventors and manufacturers claimed.

Consider the case of the steam engine. James Watt improved the steam engine produced by Newcomen and
patented the new engine in 1781. His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the new model.
But for years he could find no buyers. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there were no
more than 321 steam engines all over England. Of these, 80 were in cotton industries, nine in wool
industries, and the rest in mining, canal works and iron works. Steam engines were not used in any
of the other industries till much later in the century. So even the most powerful new technology
that enhanced the productivity of labour manifold was slow to be accepted by industrialists.

Historians now have come to increasingly recognise that the typical worker in the mid-nineteenth
century was not a machine operator but the traditional craftsperson and labourer.

In the fitting shop new locomotive engines were completed and old ones repaired. hundreds of
spindles to manufacture thread.

The Age of Industrialisation