1 Before the Industrial Revolution



All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of factory industry. When we talk of
industrial production we refer to factory production. When we talk of industrial workers we mean
factory workers. Histories of industrialisation very often begin with the setting up of the first
factories.

There is a problem with such ideas. Even before factories began to dot the landscape in England and
Europe, there was large-scale industrial production for an international market. This was not based
on factories. Many historians now refer to this phase of industrialisation as proto-
industrialisation.

In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns in Europe began moving to the
countryside, supplying money to peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an
international market. With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of colonies in different
parts of the world, the demand for goods began growing. But merchants could not expand production
within towns. This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were powerful. These were
associations of producers that trained craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated
competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into the trade. Rulers granted
different guilds the monopoly right to produce and trade in specific products. It was therefore
difficult for new merchants to set up business in towns. So they turned to the countryside.

In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began working for merchants. As you have seen in the
textbook last year, this was a time when open fields were disappearing and commons were being
enclosed. Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier depended on common lands for their survival,
gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and straw, had to now look for alternative
sources of income. Many had tiny plots of land which could not provide work for all members of the
household. So when merchants came around and offered advances to produce goods for them, peasant
households eagerly agreed. By working for the merchants, they of something could remain in the
countryside and continue to cultivate their small plots. Income from proto-industrial production
supplemented their shrinking income from cultivation. It also allowed them a fuller use of their
family labour resources.

Within this system a close relationship developed between the town and the countryside. Merchants
were based in towns but the work was done mostly in the countryside. A merchant clothier in England
purchased wool from a wool stapler, and carried it to the spinners; the yarn (thread) that was spun
was taken in subsequent stages of production to weavers, fullers, and then to dyers. The finishing
was done in London before the export merchant sold the cloth in the international market. London in
fact came to be known as a finishing centre.

This proto-industrial system was thus part of a network of commercial exchanges. It was controlled
by merchants and the goods were produced by a vast number of producers working within their family
farms, not in factories. At each stage of production 20 to 25 workers were employed by each
merchant. This meant that each clothier was controlling hundreds of workers.