How many parties should we have?



In a democracy any group of citizens is free to form a political party. In this formal sense, there
are a large number of political parties in each country. More than 750 parties are registered with
the Election Commission of India. But not all these parties are serious contenders in the elections.
Usually only a handful of parties are effectively in the race to win elections and form the
government. So the question is: how many major or effective parties are good for a democracy? In
some countries, only one party is allowed to control and run the government. These are called one-
party systems. In Class IX, we noted that in China, only the Communist Party is allowed to 1:
Activists of BJP Mahila Morcha demonstrate against hike in prices of onions and LPG in
Visakhapatnam. 2: Minister distributes ` One lakh cheque to the families of hooch victims at their
houses. 3: Activists of CPI (M), CPI, OGP and JD (S) take out a rally in Bhubaneswar to protest
against POSCO, the Korean steel company for being permitted by the State Government to export iron
ore from Orissa to feed steel plants in China and Korea. © (1) C V Subrahmanyan (2) K Gopinathan (3)
A Chakrabarty, The Hindu Po lit ica l Pa r tie s rule. Although, legally speaking, people are free
to form political parties, it does not happen because the electoral system does not permit free
competition for power. We cannot consider one-party system as a good option because this is not a
democratic option. Any democratic system must allow at least two parties to compete in elections and
provide a fair chance for the competing parties to come to power.

In some countries, power usually changes between two main parties.

Several other parties may exist, contest elections and win a few seats in the national legislatures.
But only the two main parties have a serious chance of winning majority of seats to form government.
Such a party system is called two-party system.

The United States of America and the United Kingdom are examples of two-party system.

If several parties compete for power, and more than two parties have a reasonable chance of coming
to power either on their own strength or in alliance with others, we call it a multiparty system.
Thus in India, we have a multiparty system. In this system, the government is formed by various
parties coming together in a coalition. When several parties in a multi-party system join hands for
the purpose of contesting elections and winning power, it is called an alliance or a front. For
example, in India there were three such major alliances in 2004 parliamentary elections– the
National Democratic Alliance, the United Progressive Alliance and the Left Front. The multiparty
system often appears very messy and leads to political instability. At the same time, this system
allows a variety of interests and opinions to enjoy political representation.

So, which of these is better? Perhaps the best answer to this very common question is that this is
not a very good question. Party system is not something any country can choose. It evolves over a
long time, depending on the nature of society, its social and regional divisions, its history of
politics and its system of elections. These cannot be changed very quickly. Each country develops a
party system that is conditioned by its special circumstances. For example, if India has evolved a
multiparty system, it is because the social and geographical diversity in such a large country is
not easily absorbed by two or even three parties. No system is ideal for all countries and all
situations.

I wonder how politicians manage these coalitions. I can’t even remember the names of all the
parties.

Let us apply what we have learnt about party systems to the various states within India. Here are
three major types of party systems that exist at the State level. Can you find the names of at least
two States for each of these types?  Two-party system  Multiparty system with two alliances 
Multiparty system De moc ra tic Polit ics Popular in participation It is often said that political
parties are facing a crisis because they are very unpopular and the citizens are indifferent to
political parties. The available evidence shows that this belief is only partly true for India. The
evidence, based on a series of large sample surveys conducted over several decades, shows that: 
Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people in South Asia. The proportion of those
who say their trust in political parties is ‘not much’ or ‘not at all’ is more than those who have
‘some’ or ‘great’ trust.  The same is true of most other democracies as well. Political parties are
one of the least trusted institutions all over the world.  Yet the level of participation in the
activities of political parties was fairly high. The proportion of those who said they were members
of some political party was higher in India than many advanced countries like Canada, Japan, Spain
and South Korea.  Over the last three decades, the proportion of those who report to be members of
political parties in India has gone up steadily.  The proportion of those who say they feel ‘close
to a political party’ has also gone up in India in this period.