6.2 Print Comes to India



The printing press first came to Goa with Portuguese missionaries in the mid-sixteenth century.
Jesuit priests learnt Konkani and printed several tracts. By 1674, about 50 books had been printed
in the Konkani and in Kanara languages. Catholic priests printed the first Tamil book in 1579 at
Cochin, and in 1713 the first Malayalam book was printed by them. By 1710, Dutch Protestant
missionaries had printed 32 Tamil texts, many of them translations of older works.

The English language press did not grow in India till quite late even though the English East India
Company began to import presses from the late seventeenth century.

From 1780, James Augustus Hickey began to edit the Bengal Gazette, a weekly magazine that described
itself as ‘a commercial paper open to all, but influenced by none’. So it was private English
enterprise, proud of its independence from colonial influence, that began English printing in India.
Hickey published a lot of advertisements, including those that related to the import and sale of
slaves. But he also published a lot of gossip about the Company’s senior officials in India. Enraged
by this, Governor-General Warren Hastings persecuted Hickey, and encouraged the publication of
officially sanctioned newspapers that could counter the flow of information that damaged the image
of the colonial government. By the close of the eighteenth century, a number of newspapers and
journals appeared in print. There were Indians, too, who began to publish Indian newspapers. The
first to appear was the weekly Bengal Gazette, brought out by Gangadhar Bhattacharya, who was close
to Rammohun Roy.

As late as 1768, a William Bolts affixed a notice on a public building in Calcutta: ‘To the Public:
Mr. Bolts takes this method of informing the public that the want of a printing press in this city
being of a great disadvantage in business ... he is going to give the best encouragement to any ...
persons who are versed in the business of printing.’ Bolts, however, left for England soon after and
nothing came of the promise.