3.2 Religious Debates and the Fear of Print



Print created the possibility of wide circulation of ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and
their ideas. Through the printed message, they could persuade people to think differently, and move
them to action. This had significance in different spheres of life.

Not everyone welcomed the printed book, and those who did also had fears about it. Many were
apprehensive of the effects that the easier access to the printed word and the wider circulation of
books, could have on people’s minds. It was feared that if there was no control over what was
printed and read then rebellious and irreligious thoughts might spread. If that happened the
authority of ‘valuable’ literature would be destroyed. Expressed by religious authorities and
monarchs, as well as many writers and artists, this anxiety was the basis of widespread criticism of
the new printed literature that had begun to circulate.

Let us consider the implication of this in one sphere of life in early modern Europe – namely,
religion.

In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote Ninety Five Theses criticising many of the
practices and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church. A printed copy of this was posted on a church
door in Wittenberg. It challenged the Church to debate his ideas. Luther’s writings were immediately
reproduced in vast numbers and read widely. This lead to a division within the Church and to the
beginning of the Protestant Reformation. Luther’s translation of the New Testament sold 5,000 copies
within a few weeks and a second edition appeared within three months. Deeply grateful to print,
Luther said, ‘Printing is the ultimate gift of God and the greatest one.’ Several scholars, in fact,
think that print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and helped spread the new ideas that
led to the Reformation.

Europe, celebrating the coming of print. You can see the printing press descending from heaven,
carried by a goddess.

On two sides of the goddess, blessing the machine, are Minerva (the goddess of wisdom) and Mercury
(the messenger god, also symbolising reason). The women in the foreground are holding plaques with
the portraits of six pioneer printers of different countries. In the middle ground on the left
(figure encircled) is the portrait of Gutenberg.

Print Culture