Dignity and freedom of the citizens



Democracy stands much superior to any other form of government in promoting dignity and freedom of
the individual. Every individual wants to receive respect from fellow beings. Often conflicts arise
among individuals because some feel that they are not treated with due respect. The passion for
respect and freedom are the basis of democracy.

Democracies throughout the world have recognised this, at least in principle. This has been achieved
in various degrees in various democracies. For societies which have been built for long on the basis
of subordination and domination, it is not a simple matter to recognise that all individuals are
equal.

Take the case of dignity of women. Most societies across the world were historically male dominated
societies. Long struggles by women have created some sensitivity today that respect to and equal
treatment of women are Enemies Greeting © Ares - Best of Latin America, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

De moc ra tic Polit ics necessary ingredients of a democratic society. That does not mean that women
are actually always treated with respect. But once the principle is recognised, it becomes easier
for women to wage a struggle against what is now unacceptable legally and morally. In a non-
democratic set up, this unacceptability would not have legal basis because the principle of
individual freedom and dignity would not have the legal and moral force there. The same is true of
caste inequalities. Democracy in India has strengthened the claims of the disadvantaged and
discriminated castes for equal status and equal opportunity. There are instances still of caste-
based inequalities and atrocities, but these lack the moral and legal foundations. Perhaps, it is
the recognition that makes ordinary citizens value their democratic rights.

Expectations from democracy also function as the criteria for judging any democratic country.

What is most distinctive about democracy is that its examination never gets over. As democracy
passes one test, it produces another test. As people get some benefits of democracy, they ask for
more and want to make democracy even better.

That is why, when we ask people about the way democracy functions, they will always come up with
more expectations, and many complaints.

The fact that people are complaining is itself a testimony to the success of democracy: it shows
that people have developed awareness and the ability to expect and to look critically at power
holders and the high and the mighty. A public expression of dissatisfaction with democracy shows the
success of the democratic project: it transforms people from the status of a subject into that of a
citizen.

Most individuals today believe that their vote makes a difference to the way the government is run
and to their own self-interest.

The above cartoon and graph illustrate a point made in this section (Dignity and freedom of the
citizens). Underline the sentences from this section which connect to the cartoon or graph.

I am anxious about my board exams. But democracy has so many exams.

And millions of Rosa Parks Still Inspires © Pat Bagley - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Belief in the efficacy of vote is placed above the calculus of utility Those who say that their vote
makes a difference...

South Asia Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Out co me s o f De mo crac y Exercises 1. How
does democracy produce an accountable, responsive and legitimate government? 2. What are the
conditions under which democracies accommodate social diversities? 3. Give arguments to support or
oppose the following assertions:  Industrialised countries can afford democracy but the poor need
dictatorship to become rich.  Democracy can’t reduce inequality of incomes between different
citizens.  Government in poor countries should spend less on poverty reduction, health, education
and spend more on industries and infrastructure.  In democracy all citizens have one vote, which
means that there is absence of any domination and conflict. 4. Identify the challenges to democracy
in the following descriptions.

Also suggest policy/institutional mechanism to deepen democracy in the given situations:  Following
a High Court directive, a temple in Orissa that had separate entry doors for dalits and non-dalits
allowed entry for all from the same door.  A large number of farmers are committing suicide in
different states of India.  Following an allegation of killing of three civilians in Gandwara in a
fake encounter by Jammu and Kashmir police, an enquiry has been ordered. 5. In the context of
democracies, which of the following ideas is correct– democracies have successfully eliminated: A.
conflicts among people B. economic inequalities among people C. differences of opinion about how
marginalised sections are to be treated D. the idea of political inequality 6. In the context of
assessing democracy, which among the following is the odd one out. Democracies need to ensure: A.
free and fair elections B. dignity of the individual C. majority rule D. equal treatment before law
7. Studies on political and social inequalities in democracy show that: A. democracy and development
go together.

B. inequalities exist in democracies.

C. inequalities do not exist under dictatorship.

D. dictatorship is better than democracy.

De moc ra tic Polit ics Exercises 8. Read the passage below: Nannu is a daily wage earner. He lives
in Welcome Mazdoor Colony, a slum habitation in East Delhi. He lost his ration card and applied for
a duplicate one in January 2004. He made several rounds to the local Food and Civil Supplies office
for the next three months. But the clerks and officials would not even look at him, leave alone do
his job or bother to tell him the status of his application. Ultimately, he filed an application
under the Right to Information Act asking for the daily progress made on his application, names of
the officials, who were supposed to act on his application and what action would be taken against
these officials for their inaction. Within a week of filing application under the Right to
Information Act, he was visited by an inspector from the Food Department, who informed him that the
card had been made and he could collect it from the office. When Nannu went to collect his card next
day, he was given a very warm treatment by the Food and Supply Officer (FSO), who is the head of a
Circle. The FSO offered him tea and requested him to withdraw his application under the Right to
Information, since his work had already been done. when they approach government officials to attend
to their problems.