5.1 Children, Women and Workers



As primary education became compulsory from the late nineteenth century, children became an
important category of readers. Production of school textbooks became critical for the publishing
industry. A children’s press, devoted to literature for children alone, was set up in France in
1857.

This press published new works as well as old fairy tales and folk tales. The Grimm Brothers in
Germany spent years compiling traditional folk tales gathered from peasants. What they collected was
edited before the stories were published in a collection in 1812. Anything that was considered
unsuitable for children or would appear vulgar to the elites, was not included in the published
version. Rural folk tales thus acquired a new form. In this way, print recorded old tales but also
changed them.

Women became important as readers as well as writers. Penny magazines (see Fig. 12) were especially
meant for women, as were manuals teaching proper behaviour and housekeeping.

When novels began to be written in the nineteenth century, women were seen as important readers.
Some of the best- known novelists were women: Jane Austen, the Bronte sisters, George Eliot. Their
writings became important in defining a new type of woman: a person with will, strength of
personality, determination and the power to think.

Lending libraries had been in existence from the seventeenth century onwards. In the nineteenth
century, lending libraries in England became instruments for educating white-collar workers,
artisans and lower-middle-class people. Sometimes, self-educated working class people wrote for
themselves. After the working day was gradually shortened from the mid-nineteenth century, workers
had some time for self-improvement and self-expression. They wrote political tracts and
autobiographies in large numbers.

Thomas Wood, a Yorkshire mechanic, narrated how he would rent old newspapers and read them by
firelight in the evenings as he could not afford candles. Autobiographies of poor people narrated
their struggles to read against grim obstacles: the twentieth-century Russian revolutionary author
Maxim Gorky’s My Childhood and My University provide glimpses of such struggles. in England by the
Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge. It was aimed primarily at the working class.