3.4 The Great Depression



The Great Depression began around 1929 and lasted till the mid- 1930s. During this period most parts
of the world experienced catastrophic declines in production, employment, incomes and trade. The
exact timing and impact of the depression varied across countries. But in general, agricultural
regions and communities were the worst affected. This was because the fall in agricultural prices
was greater and more prolonged than that in the prices of industrial goods.

The depression was caused by a combination of several factors. We have already seen how fragile the
post-war world economy was.

First: agricultural overproduction remained a problem. This was made worse by falling agricultural
prices. As prices slumped and agricultural incomes declined, farmers tried to expand production and
bring a larger volume of produce to the market to maintain their overall income. This worsened the
glut in the market, pushing down prices even further. Farm produce rotted for a lack of buyers.

Second: in the mid-1920s, many countries financed their investments through loans from the US. While
it was often extremely easy to raise loans in the US when the going was good, US overseas lenders
panicked at the first sign of trouble. In the first half of 1928, US Many years later, Dorothea
Lange, the photographer who shot this picture, recollected the moment of her encounter with the
hungry mother: ‘I saw and approached the hungry and desperate mother, as if drawn by a magnet … I
did not ask her name or her history. She told me her age, that she was thirty-two. She said that
they (i.e., she and her seven children) had been living on frozen vegetables from the surrounding
fields, and birds that the children killed … There she sat … with her children huddled around her,
and seemed to know that my pictures might help her, and so she helped me …’ From: Popular
Photography, February 1960.

Depression, 1936. Courtesy: Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division. overseas loans
amounted to over $ 1 billion. A year later it was one quarter of that amount. Countries that
depended crucially on US loans now faced an acute crisis.

The withdrawal of US loans affected much of the rest of the world, though in different ways. In
Europe it led to the failure of some major banks and the collapse of currencies such as the British
pound sterling. In Latin America and elsewhere it intensified the slump in agricultural and raw
material prices. The US attempt to protect its economy in the depression by doubling import duties
also dealt another severe blow to world trade.

The US was also the industrial country most severely affected by the depression. With the fall in
prices and the prospect of a depression, US banks had also slashed domestic lending and called back
loans. Farms could not sell their harvests, households were ruined, and businesses collapsed. Faced
with falling incomes, many households in the US could not repay what they had borrowed, and were
forced to give up their homes, cars and other consumer durables. The consumerist prosperity of the
1920s now disappeared in a puff of dust. As unemployment soared, people trudged long distances
looking for any work they could find.

Ultimately, the US banking system itself collapsed. Unable to recover investments, collect loans and
repay depositors, thousands of banks went bankrupt and were forced to close. The numbers are
phenomenal: by 1933 over 4,000 banks had closed and between 1929 and 1932 about 110, 000 companies
had collapsed.

By 1935, a modest economic recovery was under way in most industrial countries. But the Great
Depression’s wider effects on society, politics and international relations, and on peoples’ minds,
proved more enduring.