How is federalism practised?



20 De moc ra tic Polit ics When the demand for the formation of States on the basis of language was
raised, some national leaders feared that it would lead to the disintegration of the country.

The Central Government resisted linguistic States for some time.

But the experience has shown that the formation of linguistic States has actually made the country
more united. It has also made administration easier.

Language policy A second test for Indian federation is the language policy. Our Constitution did not
give the status of national language to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official
language.

But Hindi is the mother tongue of only about 40 per cent of Indians.

Therefore, there were many safeguards to protect other languages. Besides Hindi, there are 22 other
languages recognised as Scheduled Languages by the Constitution. A candidate in an examination
conducted for the Central Government positions may opt to take the examination in any of these
languages. States too have their own official languages. Much of the government work takes place in
the official language of the concerned State.

Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of our country adopted a very cautious attitude in spreading the use
of Hindi. According to the Constitution, the use of English for official purposes was to stop in
1965. However, many non-Hindi speaking States demanded that the use of English continue. In Tamil
Nadu, this movement took a violent form. The Central Government responded by agreeing to continue
the use of English along with Hindi for official purposes. Many critics think that this solution
favoured the English-speaking elite. Promotion of Hindi continues to be the official policy of the
Government of India.

Promotion does not mean that the Central Government can impose Hindi on States where people speak a
different language. The flexibility shown by Indian political leaders helped our country avoid the
kind of situation that Sri Lanka finds itself in.

Centre-State relations Restructuring the Centre-State relations is one more way in which federalism
has been strengthened in practice. How the constitutional arrangements for sharing power work in
reality depends to a large extent on how the ruling parties and leaders follow these arrangements.

For a long time, the same party ruled both at the Centre and in most of the States. This meant that
the their rights as autonomous federal units. As and when the ruling party at the State level was
different, the parties that ruled at the Centre tried to undermine the power of the States. In those
days, the Central Government would often misuse the Constitution to dismiss the State Governments
that were controlled by rival parties. This undermined the spirit of federalism.

All this changed significantly after 1990. This period saw the rise of regional political parties in
many States of the country. This was also the beginning of the era of coalition governments at the
Centre. Since no single party got a clear majority in the Lok Sabha, the major national parties had
to enter into an alliance with many parties including several regional parties to form a government
at the Centre.

Coalition government: A government formed by the coming together of at least two political parties.
Usually partners in a coalition form a political alliance and adopt a common programme.

Why Hindi?

Why not Bangla or Telugu?

Fe d era lism 21 Here are two cartoons showing the relationship between Centre and States. Should
the State go to the Centre with a begging bowl? How can the leader of a coalition keep the partners
of government satisfied?

Are you suggesting that regionalism is good for our democracy? Are you serious?

The States Plead for More Powers © Kutty - Laughing with Kutty © Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of
Cartoons Perils of Running a Coalition Government This led to a new culture of power sharing and
respect for the autonomy of State Governments.

This trend was supported by a major judgement of the Supreme Court that made it difficult for the
Central Government to dismiss state governments in an arbitrary manner.

Thus, federal power sharing is more effective today than it was in the early years after the
Constitution came into force. 22 De moc ra tic Polit ics Linguistic diversity of India How many
languages do we have in India? The answer depends on how one counts it. The latest information that
we have is from the Census of India held in 2011.

This census recorded more than 1300 distinct languages which people mentioned as their mother
tongues. These languages were grouped together under some major languages. For example, languages
like Bhojpuri, Magadhi, Bundelkhandi, Chhattisgarhi, Rajasthani and many others were grouped
together under ‘Hindi’.

Even after this grouping, the Census found 121 major languages. Of these, 22 languages are now
included in the Eighth Schedule of the Indian Constitution and are therefore called ‘Scheduled
Languages’.

Others are called ‘non-Scheduled Languages’. In terms of languages, India is perhaps the most
diverse country in the world.

A look at the enclosed table makes it clear that no one language is the mother tongue of the
majority of our population.

The largest language, Hindi, is the mother tongue of only about 44 per cent Indians. If we add to
that all those who knew Hindi as their second or third language, the total number was still less
than 50 per cent in 2011. As for English, only 0.02 per cent Indians recorded it as their mother
tongue. Another 11 per cent knew it as a second or third language.

Read this table carefully, but you need not memorise it. Just do the following:  Make a bar or pie
chart on the basis of this information.  Prepare a map of linguistic diversity of India by shading
the region where each of these languages is spoken on the map of India.  Find out about any three
languages that are spoken in India but are not included in this table.

Scheduled Languages of India Language Proportion of speakers (%) Assamese 1.26 Bengali 8.03 Bodo
0.12 Dogri 0.21 Gujarati 4.58 Hindi 43.63 Kannada 3.61 Kashmiri 0.56 Konkani 0.19 Maithili 1.12
Malayalam 2.88 Manipuri 0.15 Marathi 6.86 Nepali 0.24 Odia 3.10 Punjabi 2.74 Sanskrit N Santali 0.61
Sindhi 0.23 Tamil 5.70 Telugu 6.70 Urdu 4.19 N — Stands for negligible.

Source : http://www.censusindia.gov.in + Fe d era lism 23 Read the following excerpts from an
article by noted historian, Ramachandra Guha, that appeared in the Times of India on November 1,
2006: Take the example of your own state or any other state that was affected by linguistic
reorganisation. Write a short note for or against the argument given by the author here on the basis
of that example. ‘ ‘ 24 De moc ra tic Polit ics We noted above that federal governments have two or
more tiers of governments. We have government in our country. But a vast country like India cannot
be run only through these two-tiers. States in India are as large as independent countries of
Europe. In terms of population, Uttar Pradesh is bigger than Russia, Maharashtra is about as big as
Germany. Many of these States are internally very diverse. There is thus a need for power sharing
within these States.

Federal power sharing in India needs another tier of government, below that of the State
governments. This is the rationale for decentralisation of power. Thus, resulted a third- tier of
government, called local government.

When power is taken away from Central and State governments and given to local government, it is
called decentralisation. The basic idea behind decentralisation is that there are a large number of
problems and issues which are best settled at the local level. People have better knowledge of
problems in their localities. They also have better ideas on where to spend money and how to manage
things more efficiently. Besides, at the local level it is possible for the people to directly
participate in decision making. This helps to inculcate a habit of democratic participation. Local
government is the best way to realise one important principle of democracy, namely local self-
government.

The need for decentralisation was recognised in our Constitution.

Since then, there have been several attempts to decentralise So, we are like a three-tier coach in a
train! I always prefer the lower berth! power to the level of villages and towns. Panchayats in
villages and municipalities in urban areas were set up in all the States. But these were directly
under the control of state governments. Elections to these local governments were not held
regularly. Local governments did not have any powers or resources of their own. Thus, there was very
little decentralisation in effective terms.

A major step towards decentra- lisation was taken in 1992. The Constitution was amended to make the
third-tier of democracy more powerful and effective.  Now it is constitutionally mandatory to hold
regular elections to local government bodies.  Seats are reserved in the elected bodies and the
executive heads of these institutions for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Classes.  At least one-third of all positions are reserved for women.  An independent institution
called the State Election Commission has been created in each State to conduct panchayat and
municipal elections.  The State governments are required to share some powers and revenue with
local government bodies. The nature of sharing varies from State to State.

Rural local government is popularly known by the name panchayati raj. Each village, or a group of
villages in some States, has a gram panchayat. This is a council consisting of several ward members,
often called panch, and a president or sarpanch. They are directly