2 The Nineteenth Century (1815-1914)



As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose. From the mid- nineteenth century, faster
industrial growth in Britain also led to higher incomes, and therefore more food imports. Around the
world – in Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia – lands were cleared and food production
expanded to meet the British demand.

It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture. Railways were needed to link the
agricultural regions to the ports. New harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the
new cargoes. People had to settle on the lands to bring them under cultivation. This meant building
homes and settlements. All these activities in turn required capital and labour. Capital flowed from
financial centres such as London. The demand for labour in places where labour was in short supply –
as in America and Australia – led to more migration.

Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America and Australia in the nineteenth century.
All over the world some 150 million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and vast
distances over land in search of a better future.

Prepare a flow chart to show how Britain’s decision to import food led to increased migration to
America and Australia. accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns, capital flows,
ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from a nearby village or town, but from thousands of
miles away. It was not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural worker,
perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large farm that only a generation ago had most
likely been a forest. It was transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships which
were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and
the Caribbean. come and how you are earning your living. closer home in west Punjab. Here the
British Indian government built a network of irrigation canals to transform semi-desert wastes into
fertile agricultural lands that could grow wheat and cotton for export. The Canal Colonies, as the
areas irrigated by the new canals were called, were settled by peasants from other parts of Punjab.

Of course, food is merely an example. A similar story can be told for cotton, the cultivation of
which expanded worldwide to feed British textile mills. Or rubber. Indeed, so rapidly did regional
specialisation in the production of commodities develop, that between 1820 and 1914 world trade is
estimated to have multiplied 25 to 40 times. Nearly 60 per cent of this trade comprised ‘primary
products’ – that is, agricultural products such as wheat and cotton, and minerals such as coal.