Forms of power-sharing



Reigning the Reins In 2005, some new laws were made in Russia giving more powers to its president.
During the same time, the US president visited Russia.

What, according to this cartoon, is the relationship between democracy and concentration of power?
Can you think of some other examples to illustrate the point being made here? © Olle Johansson -
Sweden, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 25 Feb. 2005 Po we r -sha r ing In India, we call them State
Governments. This system is not followed in all countries. There are many countries where there are
no provincial or state governments.

But in those countries like ours, where there are different levels of government, the constitution
clearly lays down the powers of different levels of government. This is what they did in Belgium,
but was refused in Sri Lanka. This is called federal division of power. The same principle can be
extended to levels of government lower than the State government, such as the municipality and
panchayat. Let us call division of powers involving higher and lower levels of government vertical
division of power. We shall study these at some length in the next chapter. 3 Power may also be
shared among different social groups, such as the religious and linguistic groups. ‘Community
government’ in Belgium is a good example of this arrangement. In some countries, there are
constitutional and legal arrangements, whereby socially weaker sections and women are represented in
the legislatures and administration. Last year, we studied the system of ‘reserved constituencies’
in assemblies and the parliament of our country. This type of arrangement is meant to give space in
the government and administration to diverse social In my school, the class monitor changes every
month. Is that what you call a power sharing arrangement? groups, who otherwise, would feel
alienated from the government. This method is used to give minority communities a fair share in
power. In Unit II, we shall look at various ways of accommodating social diversities. 4 Power
sharing arrangements can also be seen in the way political parties, pressure groups and movements
control or influence those in power. In a democracy, the citizens must have freedom to choose among
various contenders for power. In contemporary democracies, this takes the form of competition among
different parties. Such competition ensures that power does not remain in one hand. In the long run,
power is shared among different political parties that represent different ideologies and social
groups.

Sometimes this kind of sharing can be direct, when two or more parties form an alliance to contest
elections.

If their alliance is elected, they form a coalition government and thus share power. In a democracy,
we find interest groups, such as those of traders, businessmen, industrialists, farmers and
industrial workers.

They also will have a share in governmental power, either through participation in governmental
committees or bringing influence on the decision-making process. In Unit III, we shall study the
working of political parties.

De moc ra tic Polit ics Here are some examples of power sharing. Which of the four types of power
sharing do these represent? Who is sharing power with whom?  The Bombay High Court ordered the
Maharashtra State Government to immediately take action and improve living conditions for the
2,000-odd children at seven children’s homes in Mumbai.  The government of Ontario state in Canada
has agreed to a land claim settlement with the aboriginal community. The Minister responsible for
Native Affairs announced that the government will work with aboriginal people in a spirit of mutual
respect and cooperation.  Russia’s two influential political parties, the Union of Right Forces and
the Liberal Yabloko Movement, agreed to unite their organisations into a strong right- wing
coalition. They propose to have a common list of candidates in the next parliamentary elections. 
The finance ministers of various states in Nigeria got together and demanded that the federal
government declare its sources of income. They also wanted to know the formula by which the revenue
is distributed to various State Governments. 1. What are the different forms of power sharing in
modern democracies? Give an example of each of these. 2. State one prudential reason and one moral
reason for power sharing with an example from the Indian context. 3. After reading this chapter,
three students drew different conclusions. Which of these do you agree with and why? Give your
reasons in about 50 words.

Thomman - Power sharing is necessary only in societies which have religious, linguistic or ethnic
divisions.

Mathayi – Power sharing is suitable only for big countries that have regional divisions.

Ouseph – Every society needs some form of power sharing even if it is small or does not have social
divisions. 4. The Mayor of Merchtem, a town near Brussels in Belgium, has defended a ban on speaking
French in the town’s schools. He said that the ban would help all non-Dutch speakers integrate in
this Flemish town. Do you think that this measure is in keeping with the spirit of Belgium’s power
sharing arrangements? Give your reasons in about 50 words.

Exercises Po we r -sha r ing 7. Consider the following statements about power sharing arrangements
in Belgium and Sri Lanka.

A. In Belgium, the Dutch-speaking majority people tried to impose their domination on the minority
French-speaking community.

B. In Sri Lanka, the policies of the government sought to ensure the dominance of the Sinhala-
speaking majority.

C. The Tamils in Sri Lanka demanded a federal arrangement of power sharing to protect their culture,
language and equality of opportunity in education and jobs.

D. The transformation of Belgium from unitary government to a federal one prevented a possible
division of the country on linguistic lines.

Which of the statements given above are correct? (a) A, B, C and D (b) A, B and D (c) C and D (d) B,
C and D 5. Read the following passage and pick out any one of the prudential reasons for power
sharing offered in this. “We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the dream of
Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true
democracy.

It restores power to the only place where power belongs in a democracy – in the hands of the people.
Giving power to Panchayats is also a way to reduce corruption and increase administrative
efficiency. When people participate in the planning and implementation of developmental schemes,
they would naturally exercise greater control over these schemes. This would eliminate the corrupt
middlemen. Thus, Panchayati Raj will strengthen the foundations of our democracy.” 6. Different
arguments are usually put forth in favour of and against power sharing. Identify those which are in
favour of power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below? Power sharing: A. reduces
conflict among different communities B. decreases the possibility of arbitrariness C. delays
decision making process D. accommodates diversities E. increases instability and divisiveness F.
promotes people’s participation in government G. undermines the unity of a country Exercises (a) (b)
(c) (d) De moc ra tic Polit ics 9. Consider the following two statements on power sharing and select
the answer using the codes given below: A. Power sharing is good for democracy.

B. It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups.

Which of these statements are true and false? (a) A is true but B is false (b) Both A and B are true
(c) Both A and B are false (d) A is false but B is true List I List II 1.

Power shared among different organs of government A. Community government 2.

Power shared among governments at different levels B. Separation of powers 3.

Power shared by different social groups C. Coalition government 4.

Power shared by two or more political parties D. Federal government 8. Match List I (forms of power
sharing) with List II (forms of government) and select the correct answer using the codes given
below in the lists: Exercises (a) (b) (c) (d)