National parties



Democracies that follow a federal system all over the world tend to have two kinds of political
parties: parties that are present in only one of the federal units and parties that are present in
several or all units of the federation. This is the case in India as well. There are some country-
wide parties, which are called ‘national parties’. These parties have their units in various states.
But by and large, all these units follow the same policies, programmes and strategy that is decided
at the national level.

Every party in the country has to register with the Election Commission. While the Commission treats
all parties equally, it offers some special facilities to large and established parties. These
parties are given a unique symbol – only the ofﬁ cial candidates of that party can use that election
symbol. Parties that get this privilege and some other special facilities are ‘recognised’ by the
Election Commission for this purpose. That is why these parties are called, ‘recognised political
parties’. The Election Commission has laid down detailed criteria of the proportion of votes and
seats that a party must get in order to be a recognised party. A party that secures at least six per
cent of the total votes in an election to the Legislative Assembly of a State and wins at least two
seats is recognised as a State party. A party that secures at least six per cent of the total votes
in Lok Sabha elections or Assembly elections in four States and wins at least four seats in the Lok
Sabha is recognised as a national party.

According to this classiﬁ cation, there are six recognized national parties in the country as per
notification of the Election Commission of India issued in 2023.

Does the cartoon reﬂ ect the data graphics shown on the previous page? Crunching the Numbers © Tab -
The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

For more details about registration and recognition of political parties by the Election Commission
of India, visit https:// eci.gov.in De moc ra tic Polit ics Aam Aadmi Party (AAP): Formed on 26
November 2012, following the 2011 anti-corruption movement. The party was founded on the idea of
accountability, clean administration, transparency and good governance.

In the year after its formation, AAP emerged as the second largest party in the Delhi Legislative
Assembly election. It formed a government with the support of Indian National Congress (INC). It
also emerged as the third front in the politics of Gujarat after 2022 Gujarat Legislative Assembly
election. Presently, AAP formed governments in Punjab and Delhi. In the Lok Sabha election held in
2019, it secured one seat in the Lok Sabha.

Bahujan Samaj P a r t y ( B S P ) : Formed in 1984 under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. Seeks to
represent and secure power for the bahujan samaj which includes the dalits, adivasis, OBCs and
religious minorities. Draws inspiration from the ideas and teachings of Sahu Maharaj, Mahatma Phule,
Periyar Ramaswami Naicker and Babasaheb Ambedkar. Stands for the cause of securing the interests and
welfare of the dalits and oppressed people. It has its main base in the state of Uttar Pradesh and
substantial presence in neighbouring states like Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Delhi
and Punjab.

Formed government in Uttar Pradesh several times by taking the support of different parties at
different times. In the Lok Sabha elections held in 2019, it polled about 3.63 per cent votes and
secured 10 seats in the Lok Sabha.

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP): Founded in 1980 by reviving the erstwhile Bharatiya Jana Sangh, formed
by Syama Prasad Mukherjee in 1951. Wants to build a strong and modern India by drawing inspiration
from India’s ancient culture and values; and Deendayal Upadhyaya’s ideas of integral humanism and
Antyodaya. Cultural nationalism (or ‘Hindutva’) is an important element in its conception of Indian
nationhood and politics.

Wants full territorial and political integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India, a uniform civil
code for all people living in the country irrespective of religion, and ban on religious
conversions. Its support base increased substantially in the 1990s. Earlier limited to north and
west and to urban areas, the party expanded its support in the south, east, the north-east and to
rural areas.

Came to power in 1998 as the leader of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) including several
regional parties. Emerged as the largest party with 303 members in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.
Currently leads the ruling NDA government at the Centre.

Communist Party of India - Marxist (CPI-M): Founded in 1964. Believes in Marxism-Leninism. Supports
s o c i a l i s m , s e c u l a r i s m a n d democracy and opposes imperialism and communalism.
Accepts democratic elections as a useful and helpful means for securing the objective of socio-
economic justice in India. Enjoys strong support in West Po lit ica l Pa r tie s Bengal, Kerala and
Tripura, especially among the poor, factory workers, farmers, agricultural labourers and the
intelligentsia. Critical of the new economic policies that allow free flow of foreign capital and
goods into the country. Was in power in West Bengal without a break for 34 years. In the 2019 Lok
Sabha elections, it won about 1.75 per cent of votes and 3 seats.

Indian National Congress (INC): Popularly known as the Congress Party. One of the oldest parties of
the world. Founded in 1885 and has experienced many splits. Played a dominant role in Indian
politics at the national and state level for several decades after India’s Independence.

Under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru, the party sought to build a modern secular democratic
republic in India. Ruling party at the centre till 1977 and then from 1980 to 1989. After 1989, its
support declined, but it continues to be present throughout the country, cutting across social
divisions. A centrist party (neither rightist nor leftist) in its ideological orientation, the party
espouses secularism and welfare of weaker sections and minorities. The INC supports new economic
reforms but with a human face. Leader of the United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government from 2004
to 2019. In the 2019 Lok Sabha election, it won 19.5% votes and 52 seats.

National People’s Party (NPP): Formed in July 2013 under the leadership of P.A Sangma. NPP is the
first political party from North East India to have attained the status of a national party. It
believes in diversity of the country and recognizes that different regions have different
developmental challenges.

The core philosophy of the party is education and employment to all as well as empowerment of all
sections of the society. It formed government in Meghalaya and has presence in many of North Eastern
States. In the Lok Sabha election held in 2019, NPP secured one seat in the Lok Sabha.