How do we assess democracy’s outcomes?



Do you remember how students in Madam Lyngdoh’s class argued about democracy? This was in Chapter 2
of Class IX textbook.

It emerged from that conversation that democracy is a better form of government when compared with
dictatorship or any other alternative.

We felt that democracy was better because it:  Promotes equality among citizens;  Enhances the
dignity of the individual;  Improves the quality of decision-making;  Provides a method to resolve
conflicts; and  Allows room to correct mistakes.

Are these expectations realised under democracies? When we talk to people around us, most of them
support democracy against other alternatives, such as rule by a monarch or military or religious
leaders. But not so many of them would be satisfied with the democracy in practice. So we face a
dilemma: democracy is seen to be good in principle, but felt to be not so good in its practice. This
dilemma invites us to think hard about the outcomes of democracy. Do we prefer democracy only for
moral reasons? Or are there some prudential reasons to support democracy too? Over a hundred
countries of the world today claim and practice some kind of democratic politics: they have formal
constitutions, they hold elections, they have parties and they guarantee rights of citizens.

While these features are common to most of them, these democracies are very much different from each
other in terms of their social situations, their economic achievements and their cultures. Clearly,
what may be achieved or not achieved under each of these democracies will be very different. But is
there something that we can expect from every democracy, just because it is democracy? Our interest
in and fascination for democracy often pushes us into taking a position that democracy can address
all socio-economic and political problems. If some of our expectations are not met, we start blaming
the idea of democracy. Or, we start doubting if we are living in a democracy. The first step towards
thinking carefully about the outcomes of democracy is to recognise that democracy is just a form
of government. It can only create conditions for achieving something.

The citizens have to take advantage of those conditions and achieve those goals. Let us examine some
of the things we can reasonably expect from democracy and examine the record of democracy.

Did we reach these conclusions in Madam Lyngdoh’s class? I loved that class because students were
not being dictated any conclusions. © RK Laxman - Brushing up the years Is democracy all about
coping with multiple pressures and accommodating diverse demands? Out co me s o f De mo crac y
Accountable, responsive and legitimate government There are some things that democracy must provide.
In a democracy, we are most concerned with ensuring that people will have the right to choose their
rulers and people will have control over the rulers.

Whenever possible and necessary, citizens should be able to participate in decision making, that
affects them all. Therefore, the most basic outcome of democracy should be that it produces a
government that is accountable to the citizens, and responsive to the needs and expectations of the
citizens.

Before we go into this question, we face another common question: Is the democratic government
efficient? Is it effective? Some people think that democracy produces less effective government. It
is, of course, true that non-democratic rulers do not have to bother about deliberation in
assemblies or worry about majorities and public opinion. So, they can be very quick and efficient in
decision making and implementation. Democracy is based on the idea of deliberation and negotiation.
So, some delay is bound to take place. Does that make democratic government inefficient? Let us
think in terms of costs. take decisions that are not accepted by the people and may therefore face
problems. In contrast, the democratic government will take more time to follow procedures before
arriving at a decision. But because it has followed procedures, its decisions may be both more
acceptable to the people and more effective. So, the cost of time that democracy pays is perhaps
worth it.

Now look at the other side – democracy ensures that decision making will be based on norms and
procedures. So, a citizen who wants to know if a decision was taken through the correct procedures
can find this out. She has the right and the means to examine the process of decision making. This
is known as transparency. This factor is often missing from a non-democratic government.

Therefore, when we are trying to produce a government that follows procedures and is accountable to
the people. We can also expect that the democratic government develops mechanisms for citizens to
hold the government accountable and mechanisms for citizens to take part in decision making whenever
they think fit.

If you wanted to measure democracies on the basis of this expected outcome, you would look for the
following practices and institutions: regular, free and fair elections; open public debate on © Mike
Keefe - Cagle Cartoons Inc.

Can you think of what and how the government knows about you and your family (for example ration
cards and voter identity cards)? What are the sources of information for you about the government?
Governmental Secrecy De moc ra tic Polit ics So, the best outcome of democracy is that it is a
democracy! That is what we have discovered after all this mental gymnastics? major policies and
legislations; and citizens’ right to information about the government and its functioning. The
actual performance of democracies shows a mixed record on this. Democracies have had greater success
in setting up regular and free elections and in setting up conditions for open public debate. But
most democracies fall short of elections that provide a fair chance to everyone and in subjecting
every decision to public debate. Democratic governments do not have a very good record when it comes
to sharing information with citizens. All one can say in favour of democratic regimes is that they
are much better than any non - democratic regime in these respects.

In substantive terms, it may be reasonable to expect from democracy a government that is attentive
to the needs and demands of the people and is largely free of corruption.

The record of democracies is not impressive on these two counts.

Democracies often frustrate the needs of the people and often ignore the demands of a majority of
its population. The routine tales of corruption are enough to convince us that democracy is not free
of this evil.

At the same time, there is nothing to show that non-democracies are less corrupt or more sensitive
to the people.

There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its alternatives: demo-
cratic government is legitimate government. It may be slow, less efficient, not always very
responsive or clean. But a democratic government is people’s own government. That is why, there is
an overwhelming support for the idea of democracy all over the world.

As the accompanying evidence from South Asia shows, the support exists in countries with democratic
regimes as well as countries without democratic regimes. People wish to be ruled by representatives
elected by them. They also believe that democracy is suitable for their country. Democracy’s ability
to generate its own support is itself an outcome that cannot be ignored. over dictatorship
everywhere except Pakistan South Asia Those who agree with one of the statements Very few doubt the
suitability of democracy for their own country How suitable is democracy for your country? Very
suitable Suitable South Asia Bangladesh Sri Lanka India Pakistan Nepal Overwhelming support for
democracy Those who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the people Strongly agree Agree South
Asia Sri Lanka Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Doesn’t matter to me Bangladesh India Nepal
Pakistan        Sri Lanka Democracy is preferable Sometimes dictatorship is better Out co me s o f
De mo crac y