Accommodation of social diversity



All you are saying is that democracy ensures that people do not break each other’s head.

This is not harmony. Should we be happy about it? Do democracies lead to peaceful and harmonious
life among citizens? It will be a fair expectation that democracy should produce a harmonious social
life. We have seen in the earlier chapters how democracies accommodate various social divisions. We
saw in the first chapter how Belgium has successfully negotiated differences among ethnic
populations. Democracies usually develop a procedure to conduct their competition. This reduces the
possibility of these tensions becoming explosive or violent.

No society can fully and permanently resolve conflicts among different groups. But we can certainly
learn to respect these differences and we can also evolve mechanisms to negotiate the differences.
Democracy is best suited to produce this outcome. Non-democratic regimes often turn a blind eye to
or suppress internal social differences. Ability to handle social differences, divisions and
conflicts is thus a definite plus point of democratic regimes. But the example of Sri Lanka reminds
us that a democracy must fulfil two conditions in order to achieve this outcome:  It is necessary
to understand that democracy is not simply rule by majority opinion. The majority always needs to
work with the minority so that governments function to represent the general view. Majority and
minority opinions are not permanent.  It is also necessary that rule by majority does not become
rule by majority community in terms of religion or race or linguistic group, etc. Rule by majority
means that in case of every decision or in case of © Manny Francisco - The Phillippines, Cagle
Cartoons Inc.

Outcomes of Democracy every election, different persons and groups may and can form a
majority.

Democracy remains democracy only as long as every citizen has a chance of being in majority at some
point The two images depict two different kinds of effects democratic politics can have on social
divisions. Take one example for each image and write a paragraph each on the outcome of democratic
politics in both situations. of time. If someone is barred from being in majority on the basis of
birth, then the democratic rule ceases to be accommodative for that person or group.