2.3 A New Conservatism after 1815



Following the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, European governments were driven by a spirit of
conservatism. Conservatives believed that established, traditional institutions of state and society
– like the monarchy, the Church, social hierarchies, property and the family – should be preserved.
Most conservatives, however, did not propose a return to the society of pre-revolutionary days.
Rather, they realised, from the changes initiated by Napoleon, that modernisation could in fact
strengthen traditional institutions like the monarchy. It could make state power more effective and
strong. A modern army, an efficient bureaucracy, a dynamic economy, the abolition of feudalism and
serfdom could strengthen the autocratic monarchies of Europe.

In 1815, representatives of the European powers – Britain, Russia, Prussia and Austria – who had
collectively defeated Napoleon, met at Vienna to draw up a settlement for Europe. The Congress was
hosted by the Austrian Chancellor Duke Metternich. The delegates Economists began to think in terms
of the national economy. They talked of how the nation could develop and what economic measures
could help forge this nation together.

Friedrich List, Professor of Economics at the University of Tübingen in Germany, wrote in 1834: ‘The
aim of the zollverein is to bind the Germans economically into a nation. It will strengthen the
nation materially as much by protecting its interests externally as by stimulating its internal
productivity. It ought to awaken and raise national sentiment through a fusion of individual and
provincial interests. The German people have realised that a free economic system is the only means
to engender national feeling.’ stressed the importance of tradition, established institutions and
customs, and preferred gradual development to quick change Nationalism in Europe drew up the Treaty
of Vienna of 1815 with the object of undoing most of the changes that had come about in Europe
during the Napoleonic wars. The Bourbon dynasty, which had been deposed during the French
Revolution, was restored to power, and France lost the territories it had annexed under Napoleon. A
series of states were set up on the boundaries of France to prevent French expansion in future. Thus
the kingdom of the Netherlands, which included Belgium, was set up in the north and Genoa was added
to Piedmont in the south. Prussia was given important new territories on its western frontiers,
while Austria was given control of northern Italy. But the German confederation of 39 states that
had been set up by Napoleon was left untouched. In the east, Russia was given part of Poland while
Prussia was given a portion of Saxony. The main intention was to restore the monarchies that had
been overthrown by Napoleon, and create a new conservative order in Europe.

Conservative regimes set up in 1815 were autocratic. They did not tolerate criticism and dissent,
and sought to curb activities that questioned the legitimacy of autocratic governments. Most of them
imposed censorship laws to control what was said in newspapers, books, plays and songs and reflected
the ideas of liberty and freedom Plot on a map of Europe the changes drawn up by the Vienna
Congress. long will thinking be allowed to us?’ The board on the right lists the rules of the Club
which include the following: ‘1. Silence is the first commandment of this learned society. 2. To
avoid the eventuality whereby a member of this club may succumb to the temptation of speech, muzzles
will be distributed to members upon entering.’ What is the caricaturist trying to depict? Revolution
nonetheless continued to inspire liberals. One of the major issues taken up by the liberal-
nationalists, who criticised the new conservative order, was freedom of the press.